2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X005 School Name: PS 5 PORT MORRIS Principal: DANIELLE KEANE 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S/M.S 5 320700010005 PreK3 thruGrade 8 School Number (DBN): 07X005 564 Jackson Ave Bronx, NY 10455 718-292-2683 718-292-2494 Phone Number: Danielle Keane Fax: dkeane2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Danielle Keane Ms. I. Calderon Ms. Meghan Bohan Ms. Vanessa Gulfo ElvayarisRosa NA NA Ms. A. Hickson District Information Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Ave, Bronx, NY 1045 RAlvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 Phone Number: 718-742-6548 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Ave, Bronx, NY 10462 One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Danielle Keane Isabel Calderon Meghan Bohan Armando Cruz ElvayarisRosa Vanessa Gulfo Alfredo Colon *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) WendellyMercedes Roberta Clark Lisa Bryant Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? PS/MS 5's students are tomorrow's leaders. Staff, parents, community members, students strive to uncover and foster each individuals' leadership abilities. All members of the community celebrate and cultivate our students' unique leadership qualities and talents, skills that will lead to success in high school, college, and future careers. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/MS 5, The Port Morris School for Community Leadership, which services grades Pre-K 3 through grade 8, is located in the South Bronx. The total school population, which is very diverse is 733 students. The school serves a transient population, including several dozen children in homeless shelters and families living in doubled- up conditions. Our community has one of the highest percentages of homes with maintenance defects in the city. Our diverse student population includes the highest number of students from Puerto Rico who were displaced by Hurricane Maria. At PS/MS 5, 169 or 90% of our English Language Learners are native Spanish speaking immigrants or born in the United States to parents from Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico and Puerto Rico. The remaining 10% of our English Language Learners speak one of the following languages: French, Twi, Madingo, French, Creole and Soninke. The school houses 1 prek3, 1 full day pre-k program, 3 Kindergarten classes, 3 First grade classes, 3 Second grade classes, 2 Third grade classes, 3 Fourth grade classes, 3 Fifth grade classes, 5 Sixth grade classes, 5 Seventh grade classes and 5 Eighth grade classes. There are 5 self-contained special education classes and 8 ICT classes. Each grade has a self-contained bilingual program. For the 2018-2019, a Kindergarten and first grade dual language class will be established. PS/MS 5 has developed many partnerships over the school year. They include Fordham University, Teaching Matters, Big Picture Learning, MSQI, Urban Word, ASPIRA, Doing Art Together, American Ballroom Theater, The Schubert Theater, Bronx Museum of the Arts, Music and the Brain and The Leadership Program. These partnerships enable the students and teachers to work together on improving the academics, athletics, teamwork, and listening and speaking skills. One of PS/MS 5's special initiatives implemented this year is advisory for Middle School. Advisory is a regularly scheduled period of time, where teachers meet with small groups of students for the purpose of advising them on academic, social, or future-planning issues. Working collaboratively with their grade specific colleagues, teachers grow in their professional knowledge in planning for rigorous instruction. Building the capacity of all staff in the areas of questioning and discussion will continue to improve the quality of the instructional core across classrooms and increase student performance and proficiency data. During these professional development sessions teachers analyze student work, student performance data and curriculum maps, and program resources. Teachers modify unit and daily lesson plans to target all students' including our subgroups' needs. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 77% of our students feel that our school offers enough variety of programs, classes and activities to keep them interested in school. In addition, students have the opportunity to learn to read music and play an instrument, as well as to participate in chorus and performing arts related activities. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  Students enjoy participating in community activities. Our athletic program, which consists of a basketball team and a track and field team, continues to be a success. The Middle School students participate in CHAMPS (Cooperative, Healthy, Active, Motivated and Positive Students), which features basketball, soccer and volleyball. Students benefit from the use of our constantly expanding access to technology resources including interactive SMART boards, Promethean boards, computers and laptops. 89% of the students would recommend this school to parents. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 50% of our student population consists of SWD and ENL Learners. We have an 8:1:1 Horizon Program that services Autistic Spectrum Disorder students. We have three middle school classes for the 2018-2019 school year. These students need differentiated instruction to fit their needs. They also have speech, occupational therapy, physical therapy and counseling. The program is designed for students with Autism who need language and social skill development, but are performing on/about grade-level academically. For the 2018-2019 school year, an ICT class for each grade will be established. In an ICT classroom, students are educated with age appropriate peers in the general education classroom. ICT provides access to the general education curriculum and specifically designed instruction to meet students’ individual needs. Our SWD greatest need is in Math. Based on the NYS 2018 Math data, 15% of our SWD population are proficient. PS/MS 5 has a bilingual class on every grade. In addition we have launched a dual language program this year in kindergarten and first grade. We have hired four ENL teachers to support our ENL learners this year. One need of our ENL students is ELA. Based on the NYS 2018 ELA data, 28% of our ENL population are proficient. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 97% of families say that school staff work hard to build trusting relationships. Over the past year the school has made good progress in developing strong Family and Community Ties. School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families. During the 2017-2018 school year P.S/M.S. 5 used Pupil Path to enable more communication between parents and teachers, which will be continued this year. The informal breakfast with the principal allows the school to communicate our vision and give our parents an avenue to discuss any concerns that they may have. The Staff of P.S/M.S 5 has also increased the number of parent workshops during parent engagement and after school with Title I funding. A grant funded a college awareness Saturday Program for ELL parents and students. According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 100% of program staff respect and value all children and support every child to meet high expectations. Relationships between administrators, teachers, students, and families are based on trust and respect -97% responded positively to this according to the School Quality Guide. Feedback from our State Review found teachers are using data protocols at their grade-level team meetings to analyze student work and consider next instructional steps. The school’s bilingual program has been strengthened through ongoing professional development such as instructional strategies for building the vocabulary skills of English language learners (ELLs). However, only 70% of teaching teams responded positively to working together to improve the program. This area is a focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  50% of our student population in the testing grades are SWD and ELLs. The 2018 NYS Assessment showed this subgroup underperformed the city by an average of 25 points. Based on this finding, an emphasis on rigorous and coherent curriculum across all classrooms for all students is an area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X005 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 722 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 92 87 34 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 59 53 28 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 94.2% % Reduced Lunch 23.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 68.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 4% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A NO YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 36 36 22 88.9% 1.1% 22.3% 27.4% 0.4% 0.8% 4 22% 6.8 16.1% 45% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  CCLS aligned curriculum is established in the building. Teachers of grades K-8 systematically use common assessments, such as the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark assessment and Go Math program assessments. Teachers have been tracking data and use school wide recording forms, as well as using online platforms to record and track data. There was a 67% increase in Advance data 3b Using Assessment in Instruction from September 2017 to June 2018. Priority Need:  Advance data shows only a 38% decrease in ineffective ratings in 3b Using Assessment in Instruction from September 2017 to June 2018. Additional Needs:  June 2018 Instructional Report shows PS/MS 5 under performed the city average by .13 in operations and numbers. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16   June 2108 Instructional Report shows PS/MS 5's middle school grades 6-8 under performed the city average by .14 in determining word meanings.  NYS assessment data show subgroup numbers are far below our general education student proficiency data. SWD proficiency levels in ELA and Math are 6% and 4% respectively, while general education students, proficiency levels in ELA and Math are 18% and 16%. Our ELL students proficiency levels in ELA and Math are 4% and 10% respectively. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, 90% of teachers will use school wide formative assessments to inform instruction as measured in an increase teachers' Advance score in 3d with least a 3.0. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School leaders and faculty align curricula to CCLS and/or content standards, integrating the instructional shifts, and making purposeful decisions to build coherence and promote college and career readiness for all students including ELLS and SWD. All students August 2018-June 2019 Administration, instructional specialists, team leaders, and staff  Establish a school wide data team that models and supports ongoing data use. The data team’s role will be to clarify the school’s data use vision and model using data to make instructional decisions. All students August 2018-June 2019 Administration, instructional specialists, team leaders, and staff Data team will:  Make data part of the ongoing cycle of instructional improvement;  Establish a clear vision for school wide data use;  Provide supports that foster a data driven culture within the school;  Develop and maintain a school wide data system  Data Wise will support the School Data Team (SDT) that will meet regularly and guide Data Wise implementation. Using Data Wise implementation will assist in identifying a gap in skill; examine a wider range of data in order to investigate how teaching practice is contributing to this problem; and focus efforts on solving a specific learner-centered problem. ● Through vertical and horizontal planning teachers will look at student work products in ways that provide actionable data, patterns, and trends. Staff will collect, analyze and monitor student achievement data and work samples to ensure coherence in instruction, higher level questions based on Webb's Depth of Knowledge based on student data, content, and assessment amongst all classrooms; pedagogy is delivered in the workshop model with an emphasis on whole group, small group and Individualized instruction.  Through curriculum planning sessions, instructional teams will develop standards-aligned units of instruction. Teachers Administration, instructional specialists, team leaders, and staff All students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  will engage in assessing and monitoring student mastery; assessments are reviewed by the instructional team. Instructional teams will use this student-learning data to assess strengths and weaknesses of the curriculum and instructional strategies and revise curriculum. Teachers will also engage in differentiating and aligning learning activities to meet the needs of all learners.  Through Professional Development cycle opportunities teachers will explore examples of formative/summative assessments; feedback given to the students; rubrics; effective feedback that is specific, descriptive, understandable. Impact Team, consisting of administration, instructional specialists, team leaders, and staff will engage in professional studies that aligned curriculum to CCLS and plan and refine high cognitive, challenging learning tasks based on school wide assessments.   AIS Services will be offered in cycles to lowest third school wide. Leveled Literacy Intervention, Spire, Reflex, GoMath AIS and iReady will be utilized as well in classes to support ELA and math instruction.  Elevate Education (7th Grade) College Access focusing on  developing study skill habits Increase in technology, ipads in elementary grades and chrome books in middle school will support the use of iReady. Implement Reflex Math across all grades to achieve gains in math fact fluency for students of all ability levels.  MSQI Coach will assist with restructuring of Word  Generation, which supports high-utility academic focus words. Professional studies will assist teachers working in inquiry teams to look at student work and running records data in order to make curricula revisions. Teachers will analyze and monitor the assessments given and determine if any revisions need to be made to them. Summer 2018 Title 1 1003A Funding Read Alliance. Reading program to support level 1 readers supplies and support resources.   Teacher per-session for curriculum planning to modify curriculum and rigorous task for student achievement  2018-19 SCEP-P 19  ● SLT, Parent Coordinator, PA, learning leaders and staff will reciprocally share resources, strategies and information with the outside community as well as the school community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Level 1 Students All students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, instructional specialists, team leaders, and staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Learning leaders, including members of the Impact Team and staff will reciprocally share resources, strategies and information with the outside community as well as the school community monthly throughout the school year in the form of parent engagement, learning sessions, workshops, celebrations and special events. Throughout the year community and school activities and events will be planned to encourage parents to support their children’s health and learning, guiding their children successfully through school processes, and advocating for their children. Parents will also have access to Skedula, an online grade book teachers 3rd- 8th grade utilize. The assistant principals will be responsible for oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development on best practices in the workshop model with an emphasis on whole group, small group and individualized instruction; blended learning programs; Professional books, journals, independent reading books, guided reading books, Fountas & Pinnelll Benchmark System, AIS Teachers, After-School; ; general supplies; Per session – Teachers and supervisor; Block scheduling adjustments; Outside consultants, CBO partners 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Summer Title 1 1003 A Funding: $6,000 - REad Alliance program to support level 1 readers. (4 days per week) $687.00- Supplies and materials Teacher Per-session to plan and modify curriculum. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb. 2019, 50% of our lowest third students will show an increase in two levels on Fountas and Pinnell assessments . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strength: 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, 88% of students say they feel safe in their classrooms. Based on the 2018 Advance Data there was an increase from 80% to 90% in effective to highly effective rating on Danielson 2a- Creating an Environment of Respect and Rapport. Priority Need: Based on OORS reports, there is an increase of occurrences from 300 to 400 from the 2017-2018 school year. Data patterns show that since our expansion to middle school there has been an upward trend in occurrences. 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, shows a drop from 89% to 77% of students that feel our school offers enough variety of programs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be 20% decrease in number of incidents as measured by the 2018-2019 Hourly Analysis OORS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School leaders and support staff Sept. 2018- June 2019 Whole School Entire School Community Sept. 2018- June 2019 Design Team, PBIS Team, School Staff  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Develop a plan for coordinating and focusing the social-emotional development services provided for all students. Compendium, a collection of health and wellness services and opportunities will be included in Google Drive so that it can be accessed by all members of the school community, including staff, students and parents.  Dean, Parent Coordinator, guidance counselors, social workers (Single Shepherds) will coordinate efforts with external agencies and increase communication between all stakeholders.  Parent Coordinator will work in collaboration with the District office to offer comprehensive support for parents, programs Wellness Fair.  The collaboration with Big Picture Learning will support a learner-centered community, caring mentors, strong inter-personal relationships, and equitable opportunities to achieve students' greatest potential. The PS/MS 5 Design Team will facilitate advisory pd and scheduling. Advisory planning and Professional Development time is embedded within the schedule. Advisory will take place three times a week with 29 advisors meeting with small groups of students (10)  Along with building on our existing PBIS structures, Big Picture Learning will assist in the facilitation of advisories to build a culture of connectedness. Advisory will provide opportunities to deliver high-quality social and emotional learning. Advisory will have a dedicated time, 3 times a week, all staff will be included.  Develop self-awareness and interpersonal skills through the collaboration of Woodlawn Student Leadership and Legacy, middle school students will engage in experiences, mentorship, community service and a curriculum inspired by its notable figures. Elementary school students will engage in assemblies devoted to The Leader in Me.  Through the collaboration of Single Shepard, Counselors and social workers, structures will be in place so that each student is known well by at least one adult who helps to personalize supports. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24   Build on the capacity of staff and students to actively promote a community of inclusion in each of our schools, Relationship Abuse Prevention Program and Beautiful Me Program, an educational, self-esteem program designed to educate females by promoting appreciation for their genuine qualities, accurate self awareness, and the satisfaction gained by helping others will be implemented.  Enrichment Clubs will be offered to students in grades K-5 in cycles throughout the year. The enrichment clubs will offer students with a learning experience that share a common interest, and who come together during specially designed time blocks to pursue these interests. Sanford Harmony, a social-emotional teaching program that cultivates strong classroom relationships between all students will be implemented in grades K-8.   At grade and department meetings, teachers will share student's strengths and needs to guide instructional planning which will improve equitable access to learning.  RULER Training will be embedded within PD plan. Three staff facilitators were trained over the summer and will turn key to staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. August/September through June: Parent Coordinator, Family Worker, Big Picture Design Team, Single Shepard, Administration, Dean and classroom teachers will orient parents on school policies and expectations for students.  Provide parents with a school contact person.  Communicate often to provide all families in the form of parent engagement, learning sessions, workshops, celebrations and special events. Provide social-emotional workshops for families through Sanford Harmony throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Family worker, social worker, parent coordinator, Parent/Family Workshops, Per Session, School Store Products and other incentives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a decrease in the number of incidences of 8% as measured by the Hourly Analysis OORS report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-2019 Hourly Analysis OORS Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: 2017-2018 School Quality Guide data show in increase in the Collaborative Teachers category score from 2.69-3.27.According to the April 2017 NYS Diagnostic Tool for School Effectiveness Report, teachers meet weekly by grade levels in kindergarten through grade five and by content areas in grades six through eight. In addition to the Data Wise protocol, teachers use multiple curricular resources to support their planning and professional practice. Priority Need: NYSED June 2018 Instructional Report shows our levels 3 and 4 in ELA rose 18% to 21%. However our levels 1 rose from 38% to 46%. Based on this data trend, teachers need to plan to meet the needs of all students. According to the April 2017 NYS Diagnostic Tool for School Effectiveness Report, the number of lesson plans that contained higher-level questions to promote cognitive growth and included formative assessment strategies to check for student understanding was inconsistent which resulted in low rigor and low proficiency scores on NYS assessments of 18% proficient in ELA and 14% proficient in math. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders and teachers engage will engage in collaborative learning groups to plan and implement daily lessons that are responsive to students varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs that are inclusive of all students as measured by 5% increase in the number of proficient students in the NYS assessments in ELA and Math. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers and paras Sept. 2018- June 2019 Administration, instructional specialists, team leaders, and staff All teachers and paras Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administration, instructional specialists, consultants, team leaders, and staff will engage in professional studies that are customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. -Horizontal and Vertical teacher learning teams will meet bi-monthly, collaborate, and study best practices to inform teacher decisions.-Impact team, which consists of teacher leads, admin and other stakeholders, meets monthly to analyze curriculum and student learning data in order to increase communication and transparency. -TC Curriculum will be utilized in grades K-8. Teachers will be supported with their pedagogy with a launch of a guided reading room, where teachers can have access to appropriately leveled texts and texts that are relevant to students' current and future lives, and experiences -Differentiated professional development facilitated by teacher leads, instructional leads, and coaches will increase teacher content knowledge. Curriculum planning sessions will assist teachers in 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  unpacking standards and build content area knowledge. Using Data Wise Protocols, teachers' knowledge use of utilizing data to inform instruction will assist targeting our subgroups. -Teacher teams will share unit maps and lesson plans on Google Drive to develop coherence and consensus on student goals and needs. Through curriculum planning sessions, instructional teams will develop standards-aligned units of instruction. Teachers will engage in assessing and monitoring student mastery; assessments are reviewed by the instructional team. Together with mentoring first - third year teachers, the Step Program will be piloted, to support teachers receiving a license extension. Instructional Coaches will support teacher learning. Teacher teams will utilize student work gap analysis so that teachers teams can analyze student work and use evidence of student learning to drive instruction.  Continue use of Data Wise All Staff Sept 2018-June 2019 protocols at team meetings. Establish inquiry teams where all content area teachers monitor their students' progress towards the identified outcomes and reflect on what the evidence says. Implement cycles of inter-classroom visitation and learning walks among for teachers of all content areas to analyze the differences in their in-class writing to sources assignments.  School wide schedule will be revised to include more instructional time in the content areas and to increase All teachers and paras Sept. 2018 - June 2019 PD committee 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  common meeting periods within and across grades.  PD includes- Questioning and discussion will be embedded in all curriculum maps and whole class conversations, partner talk in lower grades, student engagement and interactions; students engaged in evidence based conversations about text; differentiated instruction delivered as evidenced by environment and processes. "Educators for Student Success" will support the school in operations through schedule support, conducting teacher team walk throughs, and planning and preparation.   Teachers will reciprocally All teachers and paras Sept. 2018 - June 2019 communicate with parents about school wide and classroom academic expectations as well as their child's individual goals and performances. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration, instructional specialists, team leaders, and staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use Title one funds to support a series of workshops and learning sessions for parents focusing on collaboration. We have also purchased I-Ready so that students can work together with parents at home. Teachers will conduct monthly parent workshops unpacking curriculum goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Committee meetings, scheduling, per session and Professional books and magazines. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb. 2019, school leaders and teachers engage will engage in collaborative learning groups to plan and implement daily lessons that are responsive to students varied experiences will result in students moving 2 levels based on the F &P benchmark assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Feb. 2019 Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. x 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, PS/MS 5 received a score of 3.27 in the area of Collaborative Teachers. In the area of Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction, data showed 76% of students say that their teachers use examples of different cultures, backgrounds, and families in their lessons to make learning more meaningful. According to the 2017-2018 Compliance Report, 100% of students received related services. Pattern trend increased to 50% in movement to least restrictive environment. Priority Need: After working with Bronx Field Support as well as SESIS Support Spotlight School Liaison in 2017-2018 and reviewing our school's Individualized Education Programs (IEPs) and corresponding data through IEP reviews, we have identified over 50% of IEPS were inconsistent in regards to alignment of Present Levels of Performance with Goals and Related Service information written within IEP's across our school. Additional Needs: 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  13% of IEPS in 2017-2018 were not in compliance. 2017-2018 approximately 20% of the teachers were teaching out of license. According to the 2017-2018 Compliance Report, there was a 20% decrease in initial evaluations that were completed on time. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the quality and alignment of the IEP present levels of performance (PLOPS) and annual goals will increase by 75% as measured by in house and city reviews using the NYC DOE Shared Path to Success levels of performance checklist. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Development of a Quality IEP document/reference tool to utilize while completing IEPs. Teachers, Paraprofessionals September Administration , IEP liaison, Teachers Principal will delegate an administrative role to lead special education liaison teacher to assist teachers with compliance and completion of IEPs. Related Service Providers Liaison IEP liaison will facilitate peer review of IEPs using the Shared Path to Success levels of performance checklist. IEP liaison will train staff in writing quality IEPs with an emphasis of alignment throughout the grades and use of common assessments. 2018 -June 2019 PS/MS 5 will continue the work with Bronx Field Support in supporting The School Implementation Team (SIT) in conducting quality IEP reviews according to the school wide calendar. Based on the feedback from reviews, the SIT will plan for targeted professional development for teachers and paraprofessionals. SIT Team, Teachers, Related Service Providers and students Ongoing September 2018 Administration, Teachers, SIT Team, Liaison IEP Liaison will develop a calendar with dates for all IEPs to ensure staff members are being supported through IEP development. IEP Liaison will check in with teachers at weekly teacher meetings in order to ensure IEPs are aligned and being completed on time. Teachers, Paraprofessional, Related Service Providers - June 2019 Ongoing September 2018 - June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be active members of the IEP development process. Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Liaison and Related Service Providers will ensure parents are aware of the IEP process and conduct parent outreach in regards to the development of the IEP. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PS/MS 5 has built-in time and resources for common planning, coaching, mentoring, inter-visitations, professional development, teacher team meetings, IEP liaisons, SIT meetings and Curriculum Team meetings. In addition, the school Professional Development on Monday afternoons and a 75-minute block of time of Tuesday afternoons for parent activities and other professional work will be planned out with PD team to align school and teacher needs to increase student achievement. PS/MS 5 will continue to work with G&R ICT consultants to support teachers with station teaching in all content areas. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By Feb. 2019, 40% of IEPs present levels of performance will improve as measured by in house and Sate based reviews using NYC DOE Shared Path to Success levels of performance checklist. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The progress will be measured by: -NYC DOE Shared Path to Success levels of performance checklist. -IEP Reviews -Coach-Teacher feedback conferences Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strength: According to the most recent NYC School Quality Snapshot 88% of parents responded positively to questions about Strong Family-Community Ties. According to the April 2017 NYS Diagnostic Tool for School Effectiveness Report, resources and strategies exist such as Principal's breakfasts, Tuesday afternoon parents' sessions, and celebrations of student writing that can be built upon to communicate to students and parents high expectations for student achievement. Priority Need: Based on sign in sheets, average attendance at parent teacher conferences, workshops, and academically focused events is less than 50%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, build on existing resources and strategies to increase the average attendance at parent teacher conferences, workshops, and academically focused events by 10% as measured by the parent attendance sheets. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Build on existing resources and strategies such as the parent coordinator; Principal's breakfasts; Tuesday afternoon parents’ sessions; celebrations of student writing; social settings; holiday and musical celebrations; and English language learner (ELL) classes for parents.  Establish a Twitter feed and Facebook page.  Expand Student led conferences through Big Picture Staff and Parents, PA, SLT, CBOs and all stakeholders Sept. 2018 Staff and Parents, PA, SLT, CBOs and all stakeholders Learning  Create a comprehensive list of services available in the community such as mental health, unemployment, job related and immigration services (Parents trained in Sanford Harmony)  Conduct a series of events and workshops for parents, based on a needs assessment survey completed by parents, including a parent workshop on specially-designed instruction for students with disabilities, ELL students, and high-performing students  Continue to empower SLT members. SLT, along with the Parent Coordinator, will increase participation in workshop, meetings and involvement in the school through parent surveys. Parents will be asked for topics of interest as well as best days and times for parents to attend events/meetings.  Schedule well publicized curriculum nights, workshops and events with available child care at the school site.  Consistent follow- up to workshops and meetings to keep parents involved  Use a Facebook page to share information and school event Staff and Parents, PA, SLT, CBOs and all stakeholders Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Staff and Parents, PTA, SLT, CBOs and all stakeholders dates  Open the library every Friday from 1:50-2:40 to provide open access to parents. Parents will be able to use library computers to write resumes, to job hunt, and to find social services support  Establish a fathers' club to encourage more parent participation in school events and increase opportunities to communicate high expectation for their children's academic performances. 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  The school will use written, web based, and phone correspondence to inform and educate parents on the following:  Student progress data, attendance, and social-emotional behavioral issues  Upcoming district and school wide workshops and events  Host District 7's Wellness Week to inspire individuals and communities to incorporate the Dimensions of Wellness into their lives. o 5 day program brings together five schools with parents of students that range in age from Pre-K to 8th grade. Programs include health services, Cookshop, Wants, Wishes and Dreams Yoga and Brainpower.  Have a point person(s) in the school to assist parents and provide support in understanding the school's high expectations. SESIS Support member will facilitate parent workshops to communicate high expectations for all students.   CBO, ASPIRA will conduct ENL workshops for parents both during the day and evenings.  Offer training for parents on student learning goals, how to monitor progress, and how to help children via Skedula and Pupil Path  Mental Heath provided PD's  Beautiful Me and Circle of Serenity parent supports Staff and Parents, PA, SLT, CBOs and all stakeholders Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Staff and Parents, PA, SLT, CBOs and all stakeholders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. CBO, ASPIRA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session, staffing, schedule adjustments, access to computer lab Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Parent sign-in sheets for all school events will show a 10% increase in average attendance for school wide events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent attendance sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. N/A Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. N/a Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. N/A Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  1. 2. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. N/A Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. N/A Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. N/a Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. N/A Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. N/A Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Our delivery methods include small group instruction, as well as one to one tutoring. Our services are provided are provided during the school day, after school, on Saturdays, and during the summer months RTI (Response to Intervention) Services include but are not limited to Fountas and Pinnell Intervention System, Spire, iReady; Technology based interventions, Literacy Workshops. These strategies include strategic reading and writing. Mathematics interventions RTI, reteach, and remediation, Go Mathsupplemental intervention resources. Our delivery methods include small group instruction, as well as one to one tutoring. Our services are provided are provided during the school day, after school, on Saturdays, and during the summer months Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are identified based on results from the following: -Fountas & Pinnell assessment; NYS ELA CCLS Test 2018; NYC ELA CCLS Benchmark Assessments; Literacy classwork Performance-Based assessments/MOSL; End of Unit Assessments/On demands Students are selected based on performance in -NYS Math CCLS test 2018NYC Math CCLS Baseline and Benchmark assessments Performance-Based assessments/MOSL; GoMath Prerequisite Skills Inventory; Math Mid-Chapter test & Chapter Review 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students are placed in small groups for additional instruction to improve skills, vocabulary, and concepts in science based on performance on: -Class assignments; Quizzes; Exams, Inquiry Based Projects; Classwork; Performance-Based assessments/MOSL Small groups are established for students who require additional support in social studies based on performance on: -Chapter Test; Quizzes; Classwork; Inquiry Based Projects; Performance-Based assessments/MOSL Students are identified based on needs. Amplify Curriculum, Hands on learning, project based learning investigations, inquiry and web-based activities, Foss supplemental materials, integrated with literacy and math content areas. Passport, Independent investigative method, project based learning, current issues integrated with the core literacy area, technology supported instruction. Our delivery methods include small group instruction, as well as one to one tutoring. Our services are provided are provided during the school day, after school, on Saturdays, and during the summer months Our delivery methods include small group instruction, as well as one to one tutoring. Our services are provided are provided during the school day, after school, on Saturdays, and during the summer months PBIS, counseling, RTI tiered instruction; advisory,SIOP method ELL methodology Small group instruction, remediation in content area skills, one on one support when needed and/or mandated by student IEPs At risk services are provided during the school day, after school, on Saturdays, and during the summer months 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 96 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School Supplies, Uniforms, Hygiene Products Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 46 Uniforms, Backpacks, School Supplies and Hygiene products 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 4,700 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). All staff members attend Professional Development throughout the academic school year. Professional Development for teachers is scheduled during Professional Learning time, lunch and learns. Teachers also participate in horizontal and vertical Professional Learning Community, study groups and book clubs on areas of interest or need, inter visitations, coaching and support from consultants. At grade meetings and school wide inquiry teams, teachers reflect on instruction, assessment, and other educational and academic concerns Professional Literature is purchased to support the concept of professional learning communities. Paraprofessionals and other staff members receive Professional Development on the CCLS on the scheduled Chancellor PD day, during the PD and Professional time allocated on Mondays and Tuesdays and by participating in Professional Learning Communities and book clubs. Teachers, paraprofessionals, support staff and administrators complete a needs assessment periodically throughout the year. School Leaders receive Professional Development on the CCLS during the district meetings, citywide meetings and participating in Professional Learning Communities. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). We participate in a District-wide Kindergarten fair where we share our vision, resources and activities with PreK families. School Leaders and our Parent Coordinator attend PD sessions with the Early childhood programs to ensure that our curriculum is aligned. Parents of our Pre-k 3 and PreK students are invited to a beginning of the year orientation session where goals of the program are discussed. Parents also attend an hour and a half session with their students the first days of school to assimilate the students into the school environment. Teachers share assessment data via progress reports as well as parent teacher conferences The Parent Coordinator ensures that all records are received in a timely manner. School leaders review records to ensure students are provided with the appropriate intervention services. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The MOSL committee was responsible for making recommendations for the assessments that would be used to evaluate teachers of the student measures of learning. Once the recommendations were made; the committee informed the rest of the school of their findings and results. The staff participated in professional development sessions designed to administer, score and analyze the test to give the teachers the information they would need to inform instruction. Teachers are provided with professional development opportunities based on their informal surveys, citywide expectations, and outcomes from their observations based on the Danielson Framework 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5B, 5C, Section 6 and Section 8 x x Section 5A, 5B, 5C, Section 6 and Section 8 Section 5B, 5C and Section 8 Section 5B, 5C and Section 8 Section 5A, 5B, 5C, Section 6 and Section 8 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 689,111 x x 53,525 22,222 0 4,411,936 X x x x X X x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 SCEP-P 50   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS/MS 5 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. In accordance with ESSA, the school ensures that vital information is provided to educators, families, students, and communities through annual statewide assessments that measure students' progress toward those high standards. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS/MS 5 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  PS/MS 5 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. ● I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● Implement 120 minute literacy block including reading, writing, word study, and vocabulary ● Provide a comprehensive literacy and mathematics curriculum aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards with a focus on critical thinking, problem solving and writing. ● Daily reading and writing workshop, mini-lessons, conferencing, guided reading and strategy lessons ● Vocabulary and phonemic awareness activities ● Follow NY City Scope and Sequence units of study in Science, implement Amplify Science curriculum ● Follow the units of study in Social Studies outlined by our curriculum planning team ● Improving instruction for ELL’s to facilitate second language acquisition and assist in the transference of skills into English language learning. ● Continued professional development ● Implement the Instructional Shifts for the Common Core. ● Provide differentiated staff development for teachers to address classroom management, differentiated instruction for at-risk students and students with special needs, as well as strategies related to mathematics, reading and writing. 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  ● Provide professional development in mathematics on identified areas that students require additional support including: patterns, functions, measurement, modeling, tables, charts, estimations, predictions and problem solving. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; ● Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: 90 English Language Learners in grades 3,4,5,6,7 and 8 will receive intensive ENL instruction via a Saturday Program. The Saturday Program will run beginning December through March 2019 for a total of 10-four hour sessions with 5 certified ENL/Bilingual teachers. There will be 5 groups small in size with no more than 15 students in each group to ensure a differentiated individualized instruction. Students will be grouped within two grade spans and proficiency levels. For example, Ells' proficiency levels in grades 3 and 4 will be analyzed and then grouped accordingly into two groups. This same process will be done for grades 5 & 6 and 7 & 8. This will be the only program in session on Saturdays, hence, 1 administrator will be needed to oversee this program. DAILY SCHEDULE: 9:00-9:30 Oral Language Development: Discussions 4Learning 9:30 - 10:30 ENL Reading and Writing: Benchmark Books/On Our way to English/Rourke Language Development 10:30-11:00 Reader's Theater 11:00-11:45 Arts and Crafts Project Based: Thematic Units 11:45-12:30 NYSESLAT Practice 12:30-1:00 Comprehension Games DURING THIS SATURDAY PROGRAM ELLS WILL FURTHER DEVELOP THEIR FLUENCY AND COMPREHENSION: Reader's Theater will be used. Students will work on improving oral reading fluency, develop listening skills, develop oral expression and speaking skills, identify character traits, explore voice mood and expressions as a way to portray character traits and learn new facts and content knowledge. At the end of the program students will perform a play from the Reader's Theater to parents and will be taken to see a play by Teatro SEA where they can appreciate and link the plays and work that is put into a production. Students will be introduced to themes and topics in science and social studies. This will be done using different types of graphic organizers, such as, flow charts, KWL charts, cause and effect charts, concept webs, graphs, time lines and compare/contrast charts. Students will practice using sentence structures, enhance high frequency words and content vocabulary while reading leveled content are text. Science and Social Studies state standards will be met while addressing the ENL standards. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Our English Language Learners will develop their literacy, academic language and content knowledge using Benchmark English Explorers program. Themes that will be explored are: World Geography, World Communities, regions of the United States, Life Cycles, The Environment and Habitats. Teacher's will also use Rourke Classroom resources: ELL/Oral Language intervention kits. These kits will be used for ELLs who have been in this country for less than three years. This Kit contains Lap books and student books which lends for small group instruction or partner reading and language photo cards with differentiated instructional lessons for different language stages: entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding through the development of vocabulary and comprehension. In addition - On our way to English 2010 - differentiated reading instruction strand and oral language development strand will be used. This strand focuses on oral language development, reading comprehension strategies and writing. Discussions 4Learning is another program that will be used. It enriches the print based curriculum with explicit instruction in academic language that students will need to comprehend more challenging texts. This program is based using real -world photos and fine art to capitalize on students' curiosity about the world.It will be used on the beginning of the day during whole group discussion. The programs themes across the four levels are: Things we see and use, Our living world, Places and Spaces, Our changing world. Our Saturday program will provide participants with more intensive instruction in English in order for them to be better prepared for the state assessments in reading/writing using content area materials. it will supplement the regular day instructional program by giving students more opportunities to strengthen and improve their listening, speaking, reading, writing skills in English. NYSESLAT practice from Attanasio will be used. Teachers will use highly motivating games(The Learning Well comprehension games) to develop concrete, abstract, or critical thinking skills. These games are designed to help students at risk and ELLs, providing fundamental practice along with a lot of success to build on. The areas of listening and writing will specifically focus on the data analysis that indicated these components as areas of deficiency in many of our ELL students. Teachers will provide strategy based instruction and intervention at the right levels. Strategies will be taught consistently and sequentially at each level. The program will be supervised and evaluated by the principal. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  Part C: Professional Development All bilingual and ENL teachers providing in school Title III enhanced ENL services will be provided with professional development on English Language Acquisition and Academic Rigor according to the Common Core State Standards and the Bilingual Common Core Progression Standards to ensure English Language Proficiency. ENL strategies and student grouping will also be discussed. All teachers are invited to attend after school and lunchtime workshops and study groups that will focus on differentiation of instruction and data analysis. Professional Literature is purchased to support this initiative (How to Reach And Teach English Language Learners by Rachel Carrillo Syrja and 99 ideas and activities for Teaching English Learners with The Siop Model by MaryEllen Vogt) Professional development will be conducted by the ELL coordinator. Additional topics that will continue throughout the year will be: These PD's will be conducted on Saturdays and during Professional Development time after school hours. September: Levels of Language Acquisition and How do the different language Domains develop in ELLs October: Lowering the Affective Filter and the Importance of Cultural Connections November: Strategies for Reading December: High -Impact Strategies for Teaching the Content Areas January: Strategies for Writing February: Strategies for Math: Difficulties English Language Leaners face in math March: Lesson Preparation with the SIOP Model (language objectives clearly defined, displayed and reviewed) April: The SIOP Model - Making the lesson clear and Meaningful by using supplementary materials Bilingual Classroom teachers are sent to Professional Development offered by the Office of English Language Learner: Professional development will be conducted by Jacqueline Valentin (Bilingual Coordinator). Evelyn Roca (ENL Teacher) and Lourdes Rubio (Bilingual Teacher) will assist. Schedule of topics that will continue throughout the year are:(These professional development will be conducted once a month, Monday afternoons between 2:40 to 4:00pm.) This PD will be conducted during the mandated PD session. Title III money will not be utilized but it will impact on instruction and ENL teaching methodologies in the Saturday Title III program. October: Student Groupings according to language proficiency, skills, topic and project November: Assessments for ELLs -formal and informal(analyzing NYSESLAT and the Rigby ELL Assessment: listening, speaking, reading, writing) December: How can we provide multiple learning opportunities to reinforce key concepts and vocabulary January: Creating Opportunities for Interactions and Discussion February: Using assessment to plan instruction: flexible groupings (differentiated instruction) 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Part C: Professional Development March: Grouping configurations Support Language and Content Objectives of the Lesson April: How to have ELL students engaged 90 to 100% of the time May: Checking Learner Outcomes in the SIOP lessons All classroom and cluster teachers participate since there are ELLs in monolingual classrooms. They are specifically trained in understanding and analyzing the NYSESLAT and scaffolding instruction for their ELLs and differentiating their instruction according to their levels. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Monthly Breakfast with the Principal (held at 9:30am) Parents and administrators in a friendly environment and atmosphere communicate what to expect the following month at PS/MS 5 and parents are able to discuss concerns, ideas and praises. Tuesday afternoons between 2:40 and 3:55 all parents are invited to come to the school and participate in educational games which they can do with their child at home. These parent workshops are conducted by the classroom teachers. In this manner teachers are able to create games more suitable to the needs of their students. Monthly Parent Workshops (ex. Art Canvas, Book Bingo, Mental Health and Healthy Living ) Multiple times during the year all parents are given surveys to know how we can better assist them in the meetings. There will be a final luncheon for parents and family members of program participants where students will present a play. Parents will be invited the last month of the program to create puppets with their child. A teaching artist from LEAP will conduct this parent/child workshop. Teachers will familiarize parents on how to help oral language development at home with puppets created in class. Parents will be invited to attend ENL sessions at the school during the school day. These parent workshops will be held on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday) beginning in October. There will be three different sessions. Each session will be 8 weeks in duration. These workshops will be conducted by a licensed Bilingual Teacher). 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities PS/MS 5 will: • provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; • provide parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; • foster a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; • provide assistance to parents in understanding Common Core Learning Standards and assessments; • sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; • PS/MS 5’s parent coordinator plans monthly parent meetings and workshops on topics ranging from reading at home with your child, preparing for the state assessments to adult literacy. Both the math and literacy coaches hold workshops for parents. • Community Based Organizatons, such as LEAP, provide parent workshops integrating the arts and children’s literature as well as UFT parental workshops and Asphalt Green fitness. All of the above workshops are conducted in both English and Spanish to meet the needs of our diverse population. In addition, workshops are offered at different times during the day to increase attendance. • Parents are invited to monthly celebrations, for example publishing parties. Parents are also encouraged to attend Book Fairs and PTA meetings. Parents will be informed of activities by written communication: parent newsletters, school website, posting activities on school doors and phone messaging. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 17000 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 17000 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name The Port Morris School Borough Bronx School Number 005 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Danielle Keane Coach Assistant Principal Griselle Medina Coach R. Leuzzi ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jacqueline Valentin School Counselor Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Rafael Alvarez Parent Ms. Roman Parent Coordinator Dana Mercedes Field Support Center Staff Member Florentino Rosa Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 734 2018-19 SCEP-P 66 Total number of ELLs 186 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 25.34%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE TBE TBE DL Lang. School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2018-2019 K 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 1 1 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 7 0 0 2 0 0 9 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At PS/MS 5 teachers use data from the LAB-R, NYSESLAT, running records(EDL2 and Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark System) and the Rigby ELL Assessment which assess all four modalities, observations and teacher made assessments to provide instructional emphasis on students' strengths and weaknesses to assist in the grouping of students. Project -Based Assessments are implemented in the middle school. Grades K-8 administer writing baseline in Spanish and English. End of unit tests in content areas are also administered in Spanish and English when needed. Grades 3-8 administer the periodic assessments twice a year and our Ell students also take the ELL periodic assessment twice a year. Teachers also use the ELA and math state assessments results. The results of these tests help teachers scaffold instruction and inform their lessons to meet every student's need. Groups are formed according to our data analysis. After school and Saturday programs are also created according to the needs of our students. These programs are designed to meet the students at their needed 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  instructional level according to our quantitative and our qualitative data. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Assessments are planned school-wide or grade-wide depending on the students that will be administered these tests. School-wide assessments are organized by the Bilingual/Test Coordinator and the Math and Literacy Coaches. Grade-wide assessments are organized in grade meetings to ensure uniformity and norming. Administration collect results of tests to review and discuss next steps at grade meetings. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PS/MS 5 administer baseline and benchmark assessments(NYC Periodic Assessment, NYC ELL Periodic Assessment, NYC Math Baseline, NYC Performance Tasks). They are analyzed with an item analyzes and compared to see their growth thorough the year and from one year to another. This year we have begun administering the HLA Assessment in grades K-8. Teachers use schoolnet to view progress and standards achieved by each student individually and group their students accordingly. Grades 3-8 use math power standards assessments and MOCK ELA and math assessments to grear their lessons. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? When Growth is not attained either in one specific modality, skill or content are then a plan of actionis created with the RTI team. The RTI team will meet and discuss each child individually. Oresent in the meeting…Principal, Assistant Principal, Bilingual Coordinator, ENL Teacher, classroom teacher and any other teacher that service(bilingual intervention Provider) or instruct the student. The purpose of these meetings are to develop an intervention plan that will promote student progress, discuss ways to evaluate whether an intervention plan is effective and discuss and provide resources to conduct and evaluate this intervention. Discussion will include: -Academic and behavioral issues of the student -Student's academic and social strengths and weaknesses -Two or three areas team should focus on and develop interventions -Intervention Strategies that have been implemted and why they did/did not work -Student interests which can serve as motivation for the child -Language Proficiency levels -Years of service as an ELL 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] RTI is a school wide responsibility at PS/MS 5. High quality instruction is provided and intervention is matched to student needs. PS/MS 5 believe that we can teach all children in the least restrictive environment (the regular education classroom).ALL students in Tier 1 will receive high quality instruction, differentiated to meet their needs, and are assessed on a periodic basis to identify struggling learners who need additional support. The workshop model is used in the classroom across all subject areas. Students are taught based on data in whole, small, and individual settings. Teachers demonstrate, guide and differentiate in small group, conferring, guided reading, strategy groups and classroom environment. Translanguaging is utilized as student initiated and teacher initiated to make input comprehensible for all students. Students that are not making progress (Tier 2) are invited to academic after-school programs. In grade 1 (READ) in grades 3 to 8 will also have an academic after-school program to strengthen their academic skills in reading and math. English Language learners are invited to a Saturday Academy to receive targeted English-as-a- new language strategies that will and can be applied across all subject areas. These Saturday groups are created according to the NYSESLAT results using the EDAT tool to create these groups. These tier targeted interventions are at higher levels of intensity with more modeling, feedback and implementation. An intervention provider pushes into grades 6-8 while a pull out program exists in grades 3-5. Intervention for the bilingual students are given in their L1 and/or their L2 depending on where their needs exist. HLA assessments is used to target students needs in their L1. Tier 3 students will receive individualized, intensive interventions that target the students’ skill 2018-19 SCEP-P 68 deficits for the remediation of existing problems and the prevention of more severe problems as a pull-out program. Teachers are assigned students during their circular 6 weekly periods. Teachers slow down what they are teaching so students can be taught in deep meaningful manner what they need to learn. Those students who do not respond will be considered for additional supports via the SETSS teacher or recommended for Special education services. At all Tier levels we are identifying a problem, devising a plan, analyzing the success and establishing new goals throughout all three tiers. Teachers and service providers meet to discuss next steps for students receiving RTI. Ell grigby and EDL2 are assessments used to report progress of students. Type of Program/Strategy Used: Tier I intervention which includes differentiated instruction in all ELA and Math lessons and Tier II interventions which includes a pull-out and push-in model where a specific plan is tailored to meet the students’ individual needs by using the results of content and skill based assessments. Focus of program is for students at levels 1 and 2. This intervention is delivered in L1 and /or L2 by the AIS/bilingual specialist, depending on the proficiency level of the student and academic needs.Method of Delivery• Small group• One-to-one • Tutoring • Collect, record, analyze and document independent reading level on a monthly basis for each student in the lowest third school wide• Use of Fountas and Pinnell benchmark assessments and running records to ensure appropriate placement in guided reading groups and strategy groups• Analyze student work (reading and writing) to come to agreement on instructional strategies to be taught (September and ongoing)• Establish and ensure the use of Common Core learning Standards-based rubrics for student writing• Utilize grade level curriculum maps to guide instruction• Monitor and revise curriculum maps when indicated by evaluation of student work• Focus on the application of strategies for reading texts during shared, guided reading, read-alouds and independent reading• Create individualized student goal setting sheets • Provide remedial support and additional scaffolding for students who do not demonstrate progress based on end of unit assessments• Monitor student performance and progress on in-house generated assessments•• Align unit skills to NYS math indicators and set an interim goal of 80% correct for each ELL and SWD student.• Use student goal setting sheets for each unit that allow students to self monitor their performance and progress towards meeting unit goals.• Review with classroom teachers and math coach, end of unit item analyses sheets after every test administration, in order to provide timely information about ELL and SWD student progress and performance on unit skills and to plan next steps • Provide remedial support and scaffolding for students who do not achieve better than 80% correct on any end of unit test.• Provide feedback and translation services to ELL and SWD students’ parents about student progress towards interim goals.• Assign small group work differentiated by identified ELLand SWD student needs after analyzing student performance data on computer adaptive assessments.• Review ELL and SWD student learning goals to ensure alignment to the more rigorous cut scores for proficiency.• Provide on-going support by the Bilingual Coordinator in planning lessons incorporating ESL methodologies.• Plan differentiated instruction informed by frequent formative assessment 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. At PS/MS 5 we use the NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and Science State exams to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. The ELL Data Analysis Tool is used to determine a student has advanced or regressed a proficiency level, if a student has tested out and any at risk factors that may be impeding a student's progress. Studet's notes on the EDAT are used to discuss and better see the whole child. As a school we look at our areas of strengths and needs, as a grade and as a class. We determine what strategies and teaching methodiologies were used to achieve these results. We inform and evaluate our ELL programs through these collaboration amongst teachers across grades and departments. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We determine our Language Allocation and adjust our ELL program based on the analysis of our EDAT . Teachers analyze the results of the NYSESLAT. Students are grouped and teaching is informed according to their speaking/listening and reading/writing proficiency levels. The EDAT is discussed and all teachers receive a copy of their students data at a schoolwide Professional Develpoment. The overall school data is discussed and the ELL data and the non-ELL data from the EDAT tool is discussed. At PS/MS 5 all teachers are considered teachers of ELLs. Teachers analyze their class data and in grade groups discuss strentgths and needs of their class according to their modality levels and ELA and Math scores. Strategies are discussed and shared with the rest of the school. Strategies are implemented in the classroom and students are reassessed. Results are shared and discussed at grade meetings. These PDs begin in September and continue throughout the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our freestanding ENL program is a pull-out and push-in program. The ENL teacher groups students according to proficiency levels and grades. Our K-5 ENL teacher is also a Common Branch licensed teacher and she is able to integrate content knowledge and ENL strategies in grades k-5 as a pull-out program. In Grades 6-8 we have two ENL teachers that uses a push-in model with the content teacher in the middle school. ENL teachers collaboratively with the content or classroom teacher to best meet the student;s needs. The EDAT tool is used to group students according to modality strengths and needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. PS/MS5 has one Transitional Bilingual class in each grade K through eight. Classes are heterogeneously grouped but teachers group their students within the class according to English proficiency levels to better target language structures within a lesson and move students to a higher proficiency level. Based on their English proficiency levels students receive Home (Spanish) language arts and English as a New Language from the bilingual classroom teacher in grades k-6. The classroom teachers delivers 4 periods a week of HLA in grades K-6 and a licensed LOTE teacher services the bilingual students with 4 periods of HLA a week. Students in the TBE classrooms learn about their culture as well as the other cultures in the school community and of course the United States. The purpose is to set up a climate of acceptance where our English Language Learners feel they are part of the community and they understand there new community. Our classes are not departmentalized in the elementary level. In the middle school all Ells are serviced by bilingual teachers. Grades 5-8 are semi departmentalized. There is a grade 5/6 and a 7/8 social studies and ELA teacher. We also have a 5/6 and 7/8 math and science teacher. All four teachers are bilingual. The bilingual teacher plans with other content area teachers in the middle school to meet the students needs while also meeting the CCLS and ENL standards. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Teachers in the TBE classes with entering level ELLs spend 75 percent of instruction in student's native language and 25 percent in English. These students receive the following instruction: * English intruction:180 minutes of ENL180 minutes ENL/ELA180 minutes Integrated ENL in the Content area *Home Language Instruction:180 minutes of Home Language Instruction540 minutes of content area using their HL as the language of instruction *English InstructionTeachers in the TBE classes with low emerging ELLs receive the following instruction 40% English instruction and 60% Spanish instruction: Teachers differentiate their instruction in native language arts based on student's English proficiency levels. When teaching the content areas, concepts are taught in the native language and reinforcement of those concepts are done in English. Terminologies are developed in English and contextual meaning clarified. Non core subjects such as art, music, computer lab, and physical education are taught in English using ENL methodologies and scaffolding instructional strategies. ENL is delivered explicitly in the transitional bilingual education program through the classroom teacher. ENL instructiona and minutes are met throughout the day through differentiated instruction and small group work. ELA is delivered explicitly to ELLs. Content Area Delivery in the TBE program -Languages are separated Math Entering:50min(NL) &10min(English) Emerging/Transitioning: 45min(NL) & 15min(English) Expanding: 60min(English)with HL support Social Studies/Science Entering: 35min(NL) & 10min(English w/ESL) Emerging/Transitioning: 35min(NL) & 10 min(English w/ ESL) Expanding: 35(NL) & 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  10min(English) Art/Music/Phys. Ed. Entering: 45min(English using ESL) Emerging/Transitioning: 45min(English using ESL) Expanding: 45min(English) The second program model also implemented at PS/MS 5 is our Free Standing English as a New Language program (push-in/pull-out). This program also provides daily ENL services to children in grades K through eight. ELLs in this program are grouped according to grade and within that group they are grouped according to proficiency levels. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL teacher provide their students with English instruction using ENL methodology and instructional strategies through the content areas. They also utilize Balanced Literacy techniques and the mini-lesson model. The ENL teacher challenge the students by focusing on every student task, which encourages and incorporates high order thinking, reading, speaking, listening and writing, while still making it comprehensible to ELLs. Our ENL students also learn about their culture, other cultures within the school community and the United States. The ENL teacher has flexibility within her schedule to meet with different grade teachers to plan and articulate in order to maximize English acquisition. The ENL teacher infuses ENL strategies into content area instruction that is grade appropriate with a focus in their language proficiency levels. These students are also given L1 support through cognates and/or whenever possible reading materials in their L1 that would help them understand the content being taught in L2. Our ENL teacher refer to the grammar transfer and phonics transfer issues that ELLs might experience from their L1. Ells in this program receive all content area in English by their classroom teachers but they are trained at the school level with ENL methodologies by the Bilingual Coordinator to scaffold lessons for ELLs in their classrooms. All bilingual and ENL teachers are trained with the General ed teachers with the NYS Learning standards. The school literacy coach gives PD's and unpackes the standards with the teachers. Curriculum, unot plans and teacher lessons are aligned to the NYS learning standard. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Ells are assessed throughout the year in cycles in both English and in Spanish for our Spanish speaking ELL population. Ells in grades 3-8 are evaluated throughout the year with the EDL2. This assessment is in Spanish. It tests their reading accuracy, fluency, comprehension skills and writing ability. Grades K-2 use the Fountas and Pinnell Sistema de Evaluacion de la Lectura. This test also assesses student's accuracy rate, fluency, comrehension skills, writing ability in addition to phonics, word analysis and vocabulary developemnt. ELLs in grades K-8 use the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment in English to assess students' accuracy rate, fluency, comprehension skills, writing ability, phonics, word analysis and vocabulary. ELL periodic assessment is administred to ELLs in grades 3-8. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE students that are native Spanish speakers receive intensive instruction in Spanish. We have purchased materials that assist the teachers in providing SIFE students the extra help they need to succeed academically, such as readers that are high interest low level and age appropriate for SIFE students. SIfE students of languages other then English are placed in the Freestanding ENL program where the ENL Teacher provides intensive English as a New Language. Academic Intervention Services are given through-out the school day as a push-in model, as small group and one to one if needed by the AIS Bilingual instructor. SIFE students are invited to assist the ELL Saturday program in addition to the regular after school program that is open to ELLs. Our highest concentration of English Language Learners has been in an English school system three years or less. Our newcomers, who have been in a U.S. school system for three years or less will receive rigorous academic instruction in Spanish in the major subject areas such as reading, mathematics, science and social studies while they are are acquiring English. Newcomers will be invited to attend the Title III summer program to assist them in adjusting. The transferability level of skills in Spanish to English is quicker, easier and stronger for newcomers that have a strong native language development. Students that have a low level of literacy in their native language will receive intensive instruction. ELLs in grades 3 to 8 are 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  encouraged to participate in after school programs for literacy and mathematics provided to the general and ELL school population. ELLs in grades 1-8 will also participate in the ELL Saturday program. Our English Language Learners who have been receiving service for 4 to 6 years will receive academic intervention during the school day in small group instruction. ELLs in grades 3 to 5 are encouraged to participate in after-school programs in literacy, science and mathematics provided to the general and ELL population for preparation for the state assessments. They are provided with ENL instruction in the four modalities and stress is given to reading and writing when needed according to the NYSESLAT levels in each subgroup. Our long term ELLs are provided with academic intervention services from our bilingual AIS academic intervention teacher during the school day as a push-in model. The bilingual classroom teacher also work individually and in small groups with long term ELLs in their areas of deficiencies in order to help them succeed with the NYSESLAT as well as other State Exams. These students encouraged to attend after-school programs in literacy, mathematics and science. They are invited to attend the ELL Saturday program. Former ELLs are given 2 years of ENL support by our ENL teachers as a push-in model. ENL teachers support through vocabulary buildong, scaffolding and differentiation as needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers promote the use of Bloom’s Taxonomy and Depth of Knowledge (D.O.K.) questioning and discussion techniques in the classroom to promote critical thinking, using visuals, creating multiple entry points, using sentence starters, and scaffolding. Ps/Ms 5 foster collaboration among teachers resulting in the Push-In/Pull-out model for instruction involving the Special Education Teacher Support Services (S.E.T.S.S. )and (English Language Learners) ELL teachers across the grades. SETSS teacher will push into major subject areas to reteach and support IEP students in general education classes. The ENL teacher will target the ELL learners in the general education classroom and filtering vocabulary, providing visuals, clarify language, provide sentence starters, and graphic organizers to match the rigor of the NYS Learning Standards lessons. Oral language development through the use of Reader's Theater is used for our ELL-SWD students. Teachers use data to revise and modify lessons to accommodate the needs of these subgroups. Discussions 4 learning is used to promote group discussions whle using famous world pictures, questions are guided according to students proficiency levels. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLs and SWD students are integrated with the general education students during art, music and physical education. Their needs are met in small groups during this time in the gen ed classes. Teachers get professional development regarding scaffolding lessons and differentiation. Related service provider and ENL or Bilingual meet to plan accordingly to our SWD-ELL students. Students needs and strengths are discussed while different strategies that have been used or need to be used are also discussed during this meeting. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ELLs are included with the general student population receiving academic intervention through put the school day as a push-in and/or a pull-out model. They participate in the after school program and a Saturday program specifically designed for all ELLs in grades 2-8. Ells intervention defer according to the years of services they have received and their level of knowledge in their L1. For example, SiFE students in the bilingual classes receive intervention in their L1. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We utilize The Myon Program, which is a computerized library. All students will have an individual access and account. Myon reader personalizes reading for students recommending books based on their interests and reading level. It has a high quality audio that allows the student to read along. This program will be used during the school day and during the ELL Saturday Program. We have found that our students need to be able to read and build their stamina in English and in Spanish at school and at home. Having these books available at their reading level helps to make content comprehensible. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  In 2018-2019 school year a dual language program was opened in grades K and 1. As a result, we do not have enough students to open a TBE class in grade k or in grade 1 or a bridge K/1. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are given equal access to all school programs. Notifications to students and parents are made available in their native language. Additionally , there are many programs that have targeted recruitment for ELL students. Ps/Ms5 have ASPIRA after school programs for all students in grades 6-8, READ is offerred to 1 st grade students, Grades 3-5 have a math and ELA after school porgram, Mitey Milers (Exercise program),BOKS (Exercise program), CHAMPS (sports), ASPIRA Camp Program (during long school breaks). During the school day, MSQI for grades 6-8 and reading reform for grades K-1 are implemented for all students including ELLs., . 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All of our classrooms have Smart Boards, and students have access to laptops, chrome books and iPads. Our school has a Technology Lab, and students have Technology Lab programmed to their schedules. In-class Instructional Materials:The following instructional materials are used to support Ells in the classroom:Language Arts and Technology Brain Pop Starfall Enchanted Learning One More Story RAZ Kids MyonThese technology programs are used as independent reading in either English or their Native Language, when possible. These programs reinforce skills and strategies taught in the classroom. It offers differentiated instruction, fluency practice, vocabulary building, non-fiction and fiction readings. English as a Second Language Zip Zoom Rigby On Our Way to English Scholastic Listening Center Fluency kits Benchmark Books Math Go Math (Spanish) and English CMP3 spanish and English ExemplarsScience NYC Edition Science Harcourt and Trade Books School Publishers (Spanish or English)Social Studies NYC Social Studies (Spanish) Rosen Classroom Primary Sources (English)English Language Arts and Native Language Arts: Fountas and Pinell Phonics Lessons Teachers College Reading and Writing WorkshopLeveled Libraries in Spanish and EnglishGuided Reading Materials in Spanish and English 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Language support is given throughout all the core content areas and in Home Language arts. The HLA develop the skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing in their L1. Skills and strategies that are learned in their native language acquisition; making sense of print, using writing to communicate, playing with language structure and developing vocabulary are then transferred to their L2 acquisition. English language Learners transfer the background knowledge about texts taught in their L1 in the content areas to their L2. In our ENL program, the ENL teacher gives L1 support through teaching of cognates, grammar transfer, phonetic error transfer and text support in their home language to help ELLs in the monolingual classroom comprehend content areas. HLA language support is assessed using the Spanish Fountas and Pinnell running record kit. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All service providers and teachers in our building communicate and collaborate for the benefit of all our populations and parents. Our schools' support team meets on a monthly basis to evaluate and assure that all student support services are being met. We jointly create an action plan to ensure that these services are met. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  PS/MS 5 does not co-locate or share the building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly arrived students are invited to attend the Summer Title III program to help them adjust. Students who arrive during the school year are given a class buddy to help guide them throughout the day and to feel welcomed. They are aslo invited to attend the Saturday Ell program, which is a small ELL student - teacher ratio making it a nurturing environment. Parents are invited by the parent coordinator to all parent meetings.Our bilingual Parent coordinator contact our ELL parents to create a communication bridge between the school and the home. The ELL coordinator contact ELL parent and hold parent meetings to inform parents of school policies, educational goals in the school and classroom and the school curriculum. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? In the middle school all ELLs are offered Spanish as foreign language but since this is their native language student the class is an advanced Spanish class. Students again are assessed to inform the curriculum. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Our Dual Language pogram is a side by side model. Language of instruction alternates according to days. Hence there is a two week cycle to ensure students receive 50% of their instruction in English and 50% of their instruction in Spanish. Emergent literacy is taught in English and Spanish Alternating teacher, room and day. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers, assistant principals, paraprofessionals, ENL teachers and Special Education teachers are provided in school with professional development in English Language Acquisition with Academic Rigor aligned to the common core learning standards to ensure English Language Proficiency. At the beginning of the year teachers meet in August when needed to help with the transition of new grades and a different population of students. All of our Bilingual and ESL teachers will participate in the school professional development activities based on their grade level during faculty conferences, grade common and new teacher preparation periods and individual and group demonstration lessons within the classrooms. Designated teachers will participate in and out of school professional development training in literacy, math, ENL and RTI and will turnkey. There will also be school specific professional development activities specific for teachers of ELL students offered on a periodic basis during lunch and learns, common grade prep periods, after-school and Saturdays. Topics include: Differentiated instruction scaffolding strategies Total Physical Response SIOP model for planning lessons inter-classroom visitations ENL lesson study group and lesson modeling Unpacking the New Language Arts Progressions the six shifts and what do they mean for ELLS The NYSESLAT: What does it look like Implementation of the Bilingual Common Core Progressions: What does it mean? 2018-19 SCEP-P 74  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers are invited to attend after school and lunchtime workshops and study groups that will focus on differentiation of instruction and data analysis. Professional Literature is purchased to support this initiative. Teachers, paraprofessionals, support staff and administrators complete a needs assessment periodically throughout the year. At grade meetings and school wide inquiry teams, teachers reflect on instruction, assessment, and other educational and academic concerns. Teachers also complete reflections on the units of study they are implementing. School Leadership Team analyzes this data and determines how it can be used to better meet our students’ needs All meeting agendas and attendance are kept in the bilingual binder and in the school’s professional development binder. All teachers of ELLs, as well as monolingual pedagogues are offered the same professional development opportunities. Professional development is coordinated by the Curriculum Instructional Team, which includes the Principal, Assistant Principals, Literacy and Math Coaches, ELL Coordinator who work together to combine ideas on effective planning for teachers, on different ways to assess learning, on developing curricula and instructional materials, and assessing teachers’ needs for professional development. The team meets regularly to reflect and refine school-based practices and up-date the professional development plans. This team will provide a two-tier approach to staff development. On one level, they will work with staff to strengthen their knowledge base in literacy, mathematics and other content areas and ENL methodologies. Topics include: SIOP Model The different proficiency levels and a student's characteristic at that level Oral language support How to incorporate the four modalities in all lessons and content areas Co-operative learning and how it helps the English language learner Strategies: Scaffolding The second level, to be implemented concurrently, will focus on effective practices in the delivery of instruction, professional development which will be delivered in a variety of modes to include: in-class demonstration lessons, team teaching, grade wide conferences, study groups, extended day professional development meetings and inter-visitations and grade and language specific training. Transitional Education Bilingual teachers will meet monthly Tuesday afternoon where they can discuss program related issues and concerns as well as receive professional development training in areas specific to Bilingual Education, Literacy, etc. TBE teachers also have weekly common preparation periods with the general education teacher on their grade. During this time they can plan and discuss ENL methodologies with the general education teachers to use with their ELLs in their own classroom when needed. These professional development is given on Monday and Tuesday after school, as Lunch and Learns, and during the day during grade and departmental meetings. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All school related information is translated into Spanish since the majority of our English Language Learners are Hispanic. We have a functioning PTA association that meets once a month. They provide information for their members in both English and Spanish. The Parent Coordinator will continue to provide training for parents, address their concerns, and nurture and maintain a close working relationship between our school and parents/community. We schedule meetings for new ELL parents to our school in the fall and spring. The orientation will inform these parents of our school’s bilingual and ENL programs, the curriculum for each grade, our administrative and support staff, school arrival and dismissal schedules, regulations and policies, etc. Any new parents of ELL children that are registered after the above-mentioned date will be provided an orientation to our school by the ELL coordinator as needed on an ongoing basis. Parents of ELLs that continue to be entitled will be informed about their children’s status via written communication. Parents of all ELLs will be invited and encouraged to attend all school functions and activities i.e. Curriculum Night, Literacy Night, Test Orientation Parental Meeting. All school bulletins, newsletters, calendars, etc. will be provided in Spanish, which is our largest language minority group. We will also provide the above-mentioned information to our other ELL parents whose language is other than English in their native language to the extent possible. Multiple times during the year parents are given surveys to know how we can better assist 2018-19 SCEP-P 75  them in the meetings. Ell coordinator distributes, files and organizes all letters and parent information. All documentation is kept in the student school record and a copy is kept in the main office. Parents are provided with written information and are invited to visit our Transitional Bilingual Education and Freestanding ESL programs. Afterwards they are given a Parent Survey Form and a Program Selection Choice. All forms are collected at the parent orientation meeting and the bilingual coordinator and the ENL teacher are present and available to assist with the survey. The Freestanding ENL program is for students that speak languages other than English or for children whose parents have opted to place their Native Spanish speaking child/children in monolingual classes. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent and community participation will be conducted during in-schoolwide activities, after school time and Saturdays. Parents of all immigrant students will be invited and encouraged to attend all school functions and activities after school i.e. Curriculum Night, Literacy Night, Test Orientation(Math, ELA, Science, NYSESLAT, ELE, winter), Homecoming Harvest Weekend, Family Day and multicultural night. These parent activities will be provided by the school staff i.e. teachers, coaches, ELL coordinator, assistant principal and principal) in order to keep parents informed of curriculum, mandates, assessments, how to help their child at home and building school community. All school bulletins, newsletters, calendars, etc. will be provided in English and Spanish, which is our largest language population. We will also provide the above-mentioned information to our other parents whose language is other than English in their native language to the extent possible. Multiple times during the year parents are given surveys to know how we can better assist them in the meetings. There will be a final luncheon for parents and family members of program participants where students will present their projects via oral/written presentations. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 76 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Danielle Keane , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 77  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Port Morris School School DBN: 07X005 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Danielle Keane Title Principal Griselle Medina Assistant Principal Dana Mercedes Parent Coordinator Jacqueline Gulgar-Valentin ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Roman Parent R. Leuzzi Rafael Alvarez Florentino Rosa Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other NA Other NA Other NA Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 6/28/2018 2018-19 SCEP-P 78  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07x005 School Name: PS/MS 5The Port Morris School Superintendent: RafaelAlvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jacqueline Gulgar-Valentin ELL Coordinator Yes - on 6/13/2017 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When students are admitted to PS/MS 5 parents fill out a home language survey. They are assisted by the Bilingual Coordinator, who is bilingual in Spanish and English. Our data shows that 71.7% of our population is Hispanic. During this time an informal screening is conducted to ensure that the information written on the survey is an accurate representation of the parent and the student. This information is then recorded onto ATS by the pupil accounting secretary or the Bilingual Coordinator. During registration other forms(emergency cards, ethnic survey, etc.) are filled out by the parents and they are assisted when needed. When parents that are speakers of other languages need translation services we employ translation services when needed. The list of available languages for assistance are posted at the security agent's desk at the front entrance of the school and also in the main office. PS/MS 5 have two biliterate English/French teachers. They assist when needed, since the past two years the school has shown an increase of French speaking families and students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 79  Written Translation services are essential to ensure effective home school communication. All communication sent home from PS/MS 5 is translated into Spanish with many attempts to get the information in the other languages. The Translation and Interpretation Unit is used to assist us whenever possible. The administrative staff use telephone translation services as needed and/or requested by parents in need of such services. Translation services are also rendered from the DOE vendors. Surveys are conducted yearly to ensure we have all preferred languages in the school. We also use the RAPL from ats and also updated information is entered onto ATS from the Emergency Contact cards. . RCPL and RADL show the language the prents prefer as written or oral communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali French English Spanish Soninke Vietnamese 11 2 5 538 348 1 2 1.21 .22 .55 59.32 38.7 .11 .22 10 2 5 541 346 1 2 1.1 .22 .55 59.65 38.15 .11 .22 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Non - Applicable as of September 12, 2018 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-P 80  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Handbooks and School Safety information are distributed in the beginning of the school year. All the above mentioned information are provided in Spanish, which is our largest language minority group. We also provide the above-mentioned information to our other ELL parents whose language is other than English in their native language to the extent possible. School staff does translations in-house. Whenever needed the translation office is used. 1st week of September Parent newsletters and calendars are distributed on a monthly basis; announcements for after-school, !st week of every month School information regarding testing or upcoming activities and disciplinary letters are distributed trough-out the year as needed. Bilingual coordinator(Ms. Valentin) will translate into Spanish All other languages LTI unit will be used. Bilingual coordinator will translate into Sapnsih All other languages LTI unit will be used. Bilingual coordinator will translate into Sapnsih All other languages LTI unit will be used. Entitlement letters are distributed in September to all students who were administered the NYSITEL and the NYSESLAT. distributed trough-out the year as needed. Translated versions of these letters are accessed on the DOE website. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-P 81  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? During the beginning of the year formal face-to-face meetings will include: -Meet the Teacher Night September -Literacy Night Throughout the rest of the year meetings will include: -PTA Meetings (Monthly) -Test Orientation Parent Meeting (Fall and Spring) Through-out the year -Multicultural Night (Spring) -Parent-Teachers Conferences (November and March) Family Engagement Time (Tuesdays) -Parent Workshop -Parent Contact: In-Person, Telephone or email Every Tuesday -Parent Classes: Technology, Foreign Language, Open Access Library, ENL Bilingual Coordinator or our French Speeking Speech teacher will assist when necessary. For all other languages the over the phone interpreter services will be used. Bilingual coordinator or Our French Speaking Speech teacher will assist when necessary. For all other languages the over the phone interpreter services will be used. Bilingual coordinator or Our French Speaking Speech teacher will assist when necessary. For all other languages the over the phone interpreter services will be used. none none none 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. -During parent association meetings school will ensure that safety is on the agenda and procedures are discussed in Spanish, French and Arabic(by school staff when needed). If another language is required the LTI unit would be called. -Communicate frequently with parents via Internet, email , skedula, class jojo and letters. -Present information during parent events. -School will create a school emergency card for parents with information where families can get critical information and directions.( All information will be translated ) 2018-19 SCEP-P 82  -During parent meetings and intake, parents that prefer a language other than English will be informed on ways and process to communicate with the school ( using on line services depending on their prefered language) Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Professional Development will be conducted in the beginning of the year to make all staff members aware of the LTI unit services and resources available to them for parents who prefer a language other than English. During this PD staff will be made aware of the over the phone line and translation services offered by the DOE. An Over-the phone interpreter services info paper form the DOE will be distributed to ALL staff and personnel in the school. Main office personnel are trained on policies and procedures regarding language interpretation and translation. A^63 chancellors regulation will be distributed and explained to all school satff. Staff will sign for information distributed and held responsible for all information and following through according to chancellors regulation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) -A welcome poster is placed visibly when you first enter the school. -Language ID Guide is placed on the security desk and placed on the office counter in the main office. IEP Room. -The Parents' Guide to Language Access and Parents Bill of Rights are given as soon as possible during the Parent Coordinator's Parental Meeting. During the parent Coordinators meeting all information is discussed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In Sep survey would be distributed to gain information from parents: -Preferred language -Did they feel welcomed at the school during the past year and/or recently 2018-19 SCEP-P 83  -Were they able to participate in meaningful opportunities -Did they have access to programs -Did they have access to their child's services and education -How can the school community help you feel more welcomed An update of this survey would then be distributed again in the spring. Data would be analyzed and adjustments in the school community would be implemented. All surveys would be distributed to parents in the covered languages as needed. 2018-19 SCEP-P 84 
