 75X012 School Name: P.S. X012 LEWIS AND CLARK SCHOOL Principal: KUVANA JONES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Lewis and Clark School 307500012012 6-12 School Number (DBN): 75x012 2555 Tratman Avenue, Bronx, NY, 10461 718-409-9040 Phone Number: 718-931-8121 Fax: 718-409-9040 WCamarena@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kuvana Jones Patricia Pabon Sandra Hidalgo ToshaLittle n/a William Rodriguez JeremyRamirez n/a District Information Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: KetlerLouissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue, New York, New York, 10010 KLouissaint@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1501 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 ZeregaAvenue, Bronx, New York, 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kuvana Jones Patricia Pabon Sandra Hidalgo ToshaLittle William Rodriguez Jeremy Ramirez Joanna Zapata Cassandra Kidd Jacqueline Marenco *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) EduardaPolanco Jasmine Viray ReinaSantos Stephen Santacroce Member/Parent Member/Teacher Member/Paraprofessional Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our Mission is to prepare our students for independent living and thinking in a safe, respectful, and therapeutic environment that promotes social and academic development. Our goal is to facilitate in the development of highly educated, well-rounded students who are excited about learning; children who are enthusiastic, confident and inspired to realize their highest potential. Our school is a physically and emotionally safe, positive, student-centered climate that nurtures problem solving and encourages risk-taking as part of the learning process Our teachers   facilitate different avenues of learning, empowering students to make choices in their learning process, which we believe creates an environment where everyone can succeed. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P12X is a District 75 program that services approximately 305 students in grades six through twelve. The range of disabilities includes the following: students with autism, students who are intellectually disabled, with emotional disturbance as well as speech and language impairments. Our current population also includes approximately 33% English New Language learners (ENL) who are afforded greater supports to access academic content through support from our ENL teachers as well as ENL methodologies. Our student population participates in alternate assessments. We have a cohort of 19 classes that participate in TEACCH Methodologies {Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication Handicapped Children - TEACCH}. In addition, we have a small cohort of ABA-verbal behavior classrooms, which addresses students who are cognitively young and require, intensive pre-academic teaching. There also is a small percentage of students with the emotional disturbance classification who we support with intensive behavior interventions. P12X’s mission highlights our community’s understanding that everyone is a life-long learner, and seeks to honor the contributions of all members. Our mission statement conveys the role of teacher collaboration, which is demonstrated through our various teacher teams that meet multiple times weekly to share samples of student work, analyze data and plan corrective instruction including new instructional strategies with the goal of increasing student achievement. Our teacher teams also foster teachers’ professional reflection, the spirit of collegiality and collaboration within our school. Our school’s Theory of Action is grounded in the work of the teachers and teacher teams in collecting and analyzing student achievement data. It is rooted in a series of steps from assessment through analysis with the ultimate goal of improving student outcomes. The Theory of Action begins with teachers using assessment tools to collect data for all students and ends with students being prepared to find their métier in an ever-changing workforce. This reflects our organization’s focus on students achieving their highest level of independence in an effort to make all students college and/or career ready. Theory of Action: If we plan strategically to intellectually engage our students via the use of varied data-based strategies and assessments, along with promoting student ownership of the learning process, then we can tailor instruction to meet the individual needs of students to demonstrate mastery of standards. P12X has made substantial gains in many areas of our Chancellor’s Framework for Great Schools. These areas include rigorous instruction, collaboration, strong family-community ties, supportive environment, effective school leadership, and trust. With respect to rigorous instruction, teachers are afforded a vast array of feedback and support to improve their pedagogical practices. The Instructional Cabinet conducts monthly staff meetings and provide detailed feedback to teachers in order to cultivate and improve teachers’ instructional practices. In addition, administrators observe teachers’ practice and monitor attendance at professional development in order to assist teachers in incorporating new methodologies into their classroom practice and teacher team meetings. In the 2018-2019 school year, P12X will continue to employ strategic scheduling to facilitate teacher collaboration and increase the time students engage with Common Core aligned content. Through strategic scheduling and the teachers’ selections of professional activities we have increased by 45% the time teachers reflect upon their practice, analyze student work and make adjustments to their instruction. We have also 0  increased professional development time during which administrators meet with teachers and teachers meet with their peers in order to further support and enhance their growing pedagogical repertoire and convey the school’s expectations. With respect to effective leadership, the administrative cabinet continues to incorporate feedback from our Learning Environment Survey, UFT consultation, Extended Cabinet, parental interactions as well as one-to-one conversations with all staff members. This feedback is later incorporated into the CEP and other organizational goals and practices. Successfully incorporating feedback into our collective practices is one of many ways P12X strives to be both effective and responsive to all stakeholders of the community. The administrative body of P12X employs best practices as well as appropriately supporting students and staff. For example, following Chancellor’s Conference Day, the Instructional Cabinet received feedback from staff in which the clear message was a preference for peer-driven professional development. Based on this feedback, the administration has decided that moving forward, there will be an increased emphasis on teacher/paraprofessional-facilitated professional development. Because we see the value of teacher choice, part of the day’s program afforded the pedagogical staff the opportunity to choose from a menu of teacher /paraprofessional facilitated professional development. This feature received overwhelmingly positive feedback. The home-school connection is an essential part of our school community; parents collaborate with P12X to help us incorporate effective strategies into our classrooms. For example, following a recent School Leadership Team (SLT) meeting we received both ‘warm’ and ‘cool’ feedback following their walk-through of the school. Based on strengths and areas of growth the organization was advised to revisit our classroom libraries and look for new ways to improve student access to books. The SLT offered suggestions that were consistent with best practices and with our organization’s emphasis on increasing independent reading time for all students. However, multi-layered tiered tasks in science, social studies and the arts are not yet always regularly provided in the vast majority of classrooms, thus limiting the frequency of learning experiences that would allow for keener understanding and acquisition of skills across grades and subjects and the promotion of college and career readiness of all students Our school’s Instructional Focus: Students will meet and/or exceed their individual goals through the planning of targeted instruction and meaningful formative assessments matched to their specific academic needs, including: the arts, social emotional and transition/vocational skills. (Domain 3B & 3D) All students participate in New York State Alternate Assessment (NYSAA) and have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) with academic, social and vocational goals. They receive a full continuum of IEP mandated services. Emphasis is placed on data-based differentiated instruction using assessment tools including, Vocational Level I, SANDI, Wilson, and running records to meet the needs of individual students. Technology is infused in all curriculum areas to support classroom instruction and to increase student learning. Curriculum is designed to be hands-on and experiential. Our school has strategically focus upon student learning needs and are not population or ratio specific. Transitional planning begins as soon as students enter our school. Teachers and school based staff collaborate to develop and implement an individualized transition plan for each graduate that realistically identifies post-secondary goals. This early collaboration addresses a myriad of needs to ensure student independence and proper placement. This includes establishing OPWDD (Office of People With Developmental Disabilities) eligibility, which is the “gateway” to agency connections, completion of various psychological evaluations, securing medical and socio-emotional services, and, finally, finding an appropriate adult placement for the student. The teachers address the issues necessary to implement each goal so that each student receives the support needed to achieve his or her desired outcomes and become productive members of his or her community. On the 2014-15 Quality Review, the school received 2 “well developed” ratings in the areas of Developing Teacher Pedagogy and Establishing a Culture for Learning. Ensuring Rigorous Instruction, Aligning Assessments to Curricula, and Engaging in Professional Collaborations were all rated “proficient”. The 2017 Framework for Great Schools indicated an 93% rating for inclusive principal leadership at an increased score of 12% from 2016, 93% approval in parent-principal trust which is an increase of 6% from 2016, 96% approval in parent-teacher trust - an increase of 7% 1  from 2016, and a consistent 92% in teacher outreach to parents. SANDI scores in 2017 show a 7% increase in ELA and a 8.4% increase in math. This past school year included the use of a $100,000 grant from Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz, Jr. for Active Panels and desktop computers to enhance the use of technology in the school. Additionally, in the 2018-2019 school year, P12X will continue to focus on increasing academic achievement by providing instruction that is aligned to the Common Core but targeted to the individual learning needs of each student. We will implement the continuation of "reverse office hours", whereby administration will spend more time in each classroom for the purpose of providing formative feedback and direct assistance to teachers will strengthen pedagogy and student achievement. Having high expectations for all students and challenging each student to achieve his/her highest potential towards reaching independence define instructional expectations at P12X. Teachers provide the support needed to achieve these goals using a curriculum that is standards-based, aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), Career Development and Occupational Studies (CDOS) that all supported by Universal Design for Learning. Teachers are provided with uniform curricula that is differentiated for our various leveled learners implemented throughout our school. Instruction at our school is closely associated with relevance and respect for students' needs and abilities allowing them the opportunity for the highest learning outcomes. We strive to use multiple methods of data assessment to propel student achievement and the development of their present levels of performance (PLOP). Students are encouraged to be as independent as possible, and are given the necessary supports when needed. The lessons are designed by teachers, with individual learning styles and student needs in mind. Hands-on practices and real life experiences are the foundations of our instruction. We believe that students learn best when exposed to their community and are able to explore and experience what is being taught. Our summative assessment tools, curriculum, and formative assessments have been aligned to give teachers the tools necessary to provide rigorous instruction within a “real life” environment for students, based on each student’s IEP and addressing the Citywide Instructional Expectations (CIE). All teachers are expected to document student progress via ongoing appropriate data collection. This includes, but is not limited to, Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI), Unique Learning Systems, Attainment, Essential for Living, IEP, data collection, teacher-made assessments, NYSAA, videos and photos. We believe that our classrooms should reflect student-driven instruction that emphasize student choice, increased communication and social skills, and access of pertinent curriculum that develop the students' transition and life skills. We firmly believe that providing diverse functional classroom opportunities will ensure that our students have a solid groundwork for their future. Quads or Teams of teachers will be formed to place students in different Quads/Teams to address the factors of age-grouping, planning of corresponding rigorous academic activities and utilization of Curricula that are available for students with special needs (Unique, Attainment, ST Math {Spatial Temporal Math}, and Mathletics) We plan to use the SANDI data on Teacher’s Usage that identifies the flagged IEP goals of each student in each class for the core subjects (Math, Reading, Writing, and Communication). We also plan to utilize the Standards Report from SANDI to identify the level of each student in Math, Reading, Writing, and Communication and to use the information for planning rigorous classroom instruction, student grouping during instruction, and generating academic and transitional tasks that meets the needs of each student. We plan to form teams of teachers to analyze curricula (Unique, Attainment, ST Math, and Mathletics) and resources (IEP, GRTL, Internship sites) that are available for this school year. These teams of teachers will meet to study how the curricula and resources could effectively and efficiently address the needs of the students in the areas of Math, Reading, Writing, and Communication. A team of work site/internship teachers will also be formed to conduct self-audit of SSP13 and to meet regularly to look at addressing the needs of students that are in the work site or internship setting. 2  Data Sources: NYS IEP Assurance Review Prior Years CEP Data Unique Learning Least Restrictive Movement SANDI 2017-2018 Learning Environment Survey SY 2017-2018 School Leadership Team PASS Teacher Teams NYSAA GRTL SSP-13 RETHINK Instructional and Professional Development Surveys Vocational Assessments Unique to our school and highlights: SANDI Week-Fall and Spring Expansion of vocational opportunities for all students FY 2017-2018 Universal Design for Learning Thinking Maps Numerous partnerships with community based organizations Individualized class schedule that include blocks for GRTL, Common planning, Quad Specific initiatives TEACCH Academy NYCTF Teacher Academy Departmentalization Teaching Assistant Advisory Council 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. As aforementioned, we service 100% alternate assessment students such as students with Autism Spectrum Disorder and Intellectual Disability. We have been providing all of staff with professional development including: visits with the District 75 Autism coach, attending workshops on TEACCH methodology, ABA-VB workshops and the collaborative consultancy with the Carbone Clinic. Since we believe in fostering a collaborative work environment, all staff including school safety agents, administrative staff, school aides, and parents have learned how to reframe and reconstruct their thinking relative to communication. To meet this objective, our speech providers have presented workshops on using symbols and AAC devices and our Occupational and Physical Therapists have been training staff on sensory input and output. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P12X has made substantial gains in many areas of our Chancellor’s Framework for Great Schools. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which we believe we have made the most progress over the course of this past year include effective school leadership and a collaborative and supportive environment. These areas include rigorous instruction, collaboration, strong family-community ties, supportive environment, effective school leadership, and trust. With respect to rigorous instruction, teachers are afforded a vast array of feedback and support to improve their pedagogical practices. The Instructional Cabinet conducts monthly staff meetings and provide detailed feedback to teachers in order to cultivate and improve teachers’ instructional practices. In addition, administrators observe teachers’ practice and monitor attendance at professional development 3  in order to assist teachers in incorporating new methodologies into their classroom practice and teacher team meetings. In the 2018-2019 school year, P12X will continue to employ strategic scheduling to facilitate teacher collaboration and increase the time students engage with Common Core aligned content. Through strategic scheduling and the teachers’ selections of professional activities we have increased by 45% the time teachers reflect upon their practice, analyze student work and make adjustments to their instruction. We have also increased professional development time during which administrators meet with teachers and teachers meet with their peers in order to further support and enhance their growing pedagogical repertoire and convey the school’s expectations. With respect to effective leadership, the administrative cabinet continues to incorporate feedback from our Learning Environment Survey, UFT consultation, Extended Cabinet, parental interactions as well as one-to-one conversations with all staff members. This feedback is later incorporated into the CEP and other organizational goals and practices. Successfully incorporating feedback into our collective practices is one of many ways P12X strives to be both effective and responsive to all stakeholders of the community. The administrative body of P12X employs best practices as well as appropriately supporting students and staff. For example, following Chancellor’s Conference Day, the Instructional Cabinet received feedback from staff in which the clear message was a preference for peer-driven professional development. Based on this feedback, the administration has decided that moving forward, there will be an increased emphasis on teacher/paraprofessional-facilitated professional development. Because we see the value of teacher choice, part of the day’s program afforded the pedagogical staff the opportunity to choose from a menu of teacher /paraprofessional facilitated professional development. This feature received overwhelmingly positive feedback. The home-school connection is an essential part of our school community; parents collaborate with P12X to help us incorporate effective strategies into our classrooms. For example, following a recent School Leadership Team (SLT) meeting we received both ‘warm’ and ‘cool’ feedback following their walk-through of the school. Based on strengths and areas of growth the organization was advised to revisit our classroom libraries and look for new ways to improve student access to books. The SLT offered suggestions that were consistent with best practices and with our organization’s emphasis on increasing independent reading time for all students. During the 2017 -2018 school year, our 12:1:1 and 8:1:1 class ratios were departmentalized. Student achievement data, as well as teacher ADVANCE data, and student IEP progress monitoring indicated that our 12:1:1 and 8:1:1 populations of alternately assessed students were generally not performing at a level that satisfied the expectations outlined by the Framework for Great Schools, specifically; Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, and Supportive Environment. Our most recent School Quality Snapshot shows that only 76% of our teachers responded positively to questions about Rigorous Instruction. 80% of teachers said that they work together to design instructional programs and 84% responded positively to questions about Supportive Environment. As a cabinet, we knew that we could increase these numbers. We use the Framework to hold each stakeholder accountable for the shared goal of building capacity to driving student achievement through our schools departmentalization as an effective way to prepare our special needs students for career- readiness. Professional Learning Communities will develop instruction customized to specific student need and ability, making it inclusive of all learners. Student performance data is on an increased incline, showing that students are more effectively engaged and have the opportunity to develop critical thinking skills, as evidenced throughout domain 3 of ADVANCE data. We have established a classroom and school culture where students are challenged by their teachers and peers in a safe and supported environment. Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and school through the customization of instruction, empowerment of students with disabilities and the development rigorous instruction and thinking that promotes career readiness which we plan to continue to expand school-wide during the 2018-2019 school year, inclusive of our 6:1:1 population. 4  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75X012 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 304 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 92.1% % Reduced Lunch 32.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 6.6% 55.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 0.3% 100.0% 29.6% 3.9% 6.6% 4 21% 2.7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As evidenced by the most recent Quality Review, it is the school’s belief that students with disabilities learn best through small group, differentiated, customized instruction, and positive interactions with their teachers is evident across the majority of classes. Additionally, the supports and extensions made to the curriculum increase student learning. Also included is our growing implementation and development of TEACCH classrooms for students with Autism as well as all students consistent movement to their least restrictive environment. For the 2018 -2019 school year teachers chose to continue with the Attainment Core Curriculum. The curriculum is aligned to CCLS, NYSAA, Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) and embeds Career Development Occupational Standards (CDOS) throughout. This decision supports teachers in differentiating instruction for students and suggestions for Understanding by Design (UDL). The curriculum is age appropriate and includes pre and post assessments for diverse groups of students, check lists, leveled text to support learning and student progress. To ensure vertical and horizontal curriculum alignment/ coherence and to support learning/engagement, improve higher order thinking skills and student readiness for post-secondary living the school’s curriculum team creates monthly curriculum maps, rigorous performance tasks and rubrics in English Language Arts (ELA), Math, Social Studies, Science and Transition core curriculum, utilizing Attainment. In determining our strengths and needs, we have carefully considered our instructional programs, our achievement data from the 2017-2018 school year, how the data has trended over a multiple year period, and academic resources in order to identify appropriate foci for student growth. Through evaluation of our assessment results from the 2017-2018 school year, we have found that our students are demonstrating strong and consistent scores across multiple years in both the local SANDI assessment as well as the state NYSAA assessment. With assessment measures as a seemingly stable and strong suit of the school annually, we have decided to shift our focus toward improvement of instruction techniques within the classroom. Our Quality Review report from the 2014-2015 school year paints a picture of proficient and well developed practices within our school. Concerning our improvement effort on assessment methodologies, the quality reviewer noted " Across the school, Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) and Formative Assessment System for Teachers (FAST) assessments that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards are used as baselines, pre-test and post-test. The results are used by administrators for classroom placements and by teachers to group students and drive instruction. At 12X, students are assessed for readiness and interest, inform their learning profile The school utilizes an Individualized Educational Plan (IEP) tracking form to monitor student's progress toward the achievement of their IEP goals. Teachers, Paraprofessionals and the schools Assessment Coordinator analyze data gleaned from SANDI to create IEP goals for their students and to identify target areas to incorporate in their lessons." These 6  practices have been developed over years and support our teaching community’s strong emphasis on reflective teaching practices through the use of data driven decisions aligned to student individual needs. Additionally, regarding pedagogy within the school, the reviewer noted that "Teachers across classrooms os students with Autism Spectrum Disorder used structured teaching via TEACCH (Treatment and Education of Autistic and Communication-handicapped Children) to methodology to help students connect with their environment and thus better attend to their educational needs. In a 9th grade class, the teacher uses a Velcro system to schedule daily activities for students to follow. Students move the activity card from the board to their desk as they move through the day. The school provides students with a safe and nurturing environment to learn. Students who need time to refocus or need a quiet corner work at their workstations assisted by classroom and Individual Educational Plan (IEP) paraprofessionals. Related Service personnel push into the classrooms to support students in their natural environments. Students interact with each other through purposefully designed interactive activities." This demonstrates our long standing effort to clearly align common core learning standards with student needs, both academically and with a transition-based mindset in order to produce curriculum that is both purposeful and meaningful to all stakeholders. Furthermore, our quality review report indicates that " Teacher teams meet several times a week to develop their pedagogical practices and look for additional ways to implement the CCLS Instructional Shifts in their curriculum maps, unit plans and daily lessons. They discuss instructional strategies that are most effective for students and use the learning acquired in the meetings to refine their delivery of instruction to increase progression of student learning goals. Teachers at the teacher team meeting shared that they collaborate well together and regularly exchange materials, resources and lesson plans. they also stated that they conduct lots of inter-visitations to learn from one another's practices" demonstrating our focus on the development of teaching professionals who continually improve their practice through collaboration, sharing of best practices, and reflection to strengthen pedagogical decision making. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2019 school year, there will be a 10% increase in students' 4 core communication skill attainment scores as measured by pre- and post- benchmark assessments by effectively utilizing Depth of Knowledge along with customized Common Core aligned lessons to engage students. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Adaptation/modification of rigorous customized Common Core curricular and vocational domains for each learner Families will be engaged and students will be supported in their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core at home via: *Posting of handy links on the school website *Posting of extended thinking questions on the school website *Sending home newsletters with strategies to help their child *Inviting parents in for curricular based workshops * Tuesday outreach meetings and other activities in a format and language that parents and students can understand. Adoption of TEACCH methodologies in classrooms serving students with Autism Families will be engaged and students will be supported in their understanding of TEACCH methodologies via: *Posting of handy links on the school website *Posting of extended thinking questions on the school website *Sending home newsletters with strategies to help their child *Inviting parents in for curricular based workshops * Tuesday outreach meetings and other activities in a format and language that parents and students can understand. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 6:1:1 ,8:1:1 and 12:1:1 Student Population Monthly beginning September 2018-June 2019 6:1:1 Classes Monthly beginning September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Paraprofessionals Instructional Support Coordinators Attendance Teacher Data Specialist AP Principal Teachers Paraprofessionals Instructional Support Coordinators Data Specialist AP Principal 8  Teachers and paraprofessionals will participate in weekly inquiry work, based on comprehension strategies and analysis of student data and analyze curriculum. All Students Teachers plan lessons & Performance Tasks. Performance Tasks will be created and implemented at the each unit of study in October 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019 Monthly beginning September 2018-June 2019 Teachers Paraprofessionals Instructional Support Coordinators Data Specialist Structured inter-visitations and learning walks to promote sharing of best practices focusing on specific questioning/communication strategies and debriefing with coaches and administration. Classroom Staff Monthly beginning September 2018-June 2019 Structured weekly professional inquiry interdisciplinary team meetings and common planning meetings focused on specific communication strategies and student data progress analysis with debrief with coaches and administration. Classroom and Cluster Staff Weekly beginning September 2018-June 2019 Structured biweekly student data progress analysis with debrief with coaches and administration. Classroom and Cluster Staff Weekly beginning September 2018-June 2019 AP Principal Teachers Paraprofessionals Instructional Support Coordinators Data Specialist AP Principal Teachers Paraprofessionals Instructional Support Coordinators Data Specialist AP Principal Teachers Paraprofessionals Instructional Support Coordinators Data Specialist 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement AP How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In order to engage families in supporting the development of communication skills between the school and home environments, P12x will engage in the following activities: Parent members from the SLT team and PA will be invited to work with the Curriculum Development Teams, Lead Teachers, Parent Coordinator and School Administration on developing a system of expectations and skills development to be implemented within the home environment for students to work towards achieving their goals also at home. This team will hold a series of workshops for parents to inform parents in the school-wide assessments that determine student goals as well as school wide curriculum. Ongoing support for parents as it relates to the Curriculum will be provided by the Administration, Curriculum Teams parent coordinator, related services providers assigned to classes and teachers in the form of identifying and collaborating with specific parents and their needs on a case by case basis. Parents will be surveyed at the mid-year point to bring relevant data regarding parent participation within the system and satisfaction with the system. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Built in progress monitoring time so teachers/teams can analyze data Scheduled weekly PLC/Inquiry meetings to discuss skills, strategies, student data and progress monitoring. Scheduled observation cycle Attainment will be utilized in all classrooms. PBIS to support social emotional growth. Interactive whiteboards in all new classrooms Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All stakeholders involved will review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan as necessary during the following benchmarking periods: October 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019 as well as during the 4 scheduled marking periods. We will conduct a mind-point benchmark assessment at the close of the FAST administration period with an expected minimum score increase of 2%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 0  Formative & summative test results are analyzed by teachers in Inquiry meetings. Teachers engage in Looking At Student Work Protocols with a focus on unit Performance Tasks in October 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019, in addition to SANDI/FAST scores. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We proactively address the needs of the students through highly integrated supports including School Wide Positive Behavior Supports, Functional Behavior Assessments and Behavior Intervention Plans. All staff members know and use a strategic and comprehensive system for referral and support for all students that includes researched-based programs and practices intended to promote academic success, family engagement, and student emotional health and wellness by implementing Get Ready to Learn (GRTL) and Social Emotional Literacy (SEL). The data collected by classroom staff has identified areas of needs and strategies to promote students’ social emotional health and is evident by the steady decrease in referrals made from the classroom. The development of weekly check and connect meetings by student population has allowed for staff collaboration in order to communicate the important roles of all stakeholders to ensure proper support for all students. The school has implemented data tracking using SANDI, Social Emotional Standards (SEL) and Get ready to Learn (GRTL) in order to monitor student needs and adjust as needed. Staff meets weekly in Instructional Teacher Teams to discuss and track data across the classes and develop plans and goals for students both academically and socially. School wide there has been a steady decrease in referrals based on our School–Wide Information System (SWIS) reports from 2016-2017 to 2017-2018. Last year, we have revamped our Positive Behavior Intervention Support (PBIS) program to include student, parent and staff handbooks outlining behavior expectations, ladder of referral, reward system and behavior strategies. The mission of P 12X’s behavior management system is to promote a safe learning environment for all of our students. We believe that by making expectations clear, and directly teaching the behaviors that we want to see, students will make better choices and thereby experience more positive outcomes in their daily routines. At P 12X, a disruptive behavior is treated as a skill deficit and the necessary supports are provided to ensure student progress. The development of pro-social behaviors and interpersonal relationship skills is an important part of the educational process. Accordingly, our school has implemented a set of school-wide expectations for behavior. It is our expectation that all of our students will demonstrate the ability to: Be Safe, Be Organized, Be Accountable, and Be Respectful {S.O. A. R.} throughout all of their interactions and across every context. Our four expectations are adopted and individualized across the various school environments (cafeteria, classroom, etc.) to ensure that behavioral expectations are clear, teachable, observable, and acknowledgeable throughout the 2  school. Our school-wide expectations are used by the faculty as a framework for designing and implementing instructional plans that emphasize the connection between choices and outcomes. A key component of our school-wide behavior plan is our data collection system. The performance of each student is tracked and documented on an individualized student performance log. In addition, students demonstrating a pattern of self-defeating behaviors are tracked using the SWIS referral system. This system empowers our behavior team with the ability to design data-driven interventions based on individual student needs. Behavioral support is then differentiated and individualized to the specific needs and abilities of each student. We have developed a behavior matrix to clearly define what these expectations mean. The matrix is designed to take each expectation and apply it to all settings our students work and play: classroom(s), hallways, cafeteria, bathroom, etc. In order for PBIS to be effective, we hope to bring a consistent level of effort towards these SOAR Matrix to all areas of the school, all of the time. Our school staff is 98% Trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention in Schools (TCIS). During the 2018-2019 school year the P12x staff will be trained in emotional literacy and its components. Emotional literacy and its components will be utilized throughout the school environment such as school charter, classroom charters and mood meter daily check-ins. In addition, emotional literacy words will be embedded into English Language Arts curriculum map and practiced throughout the school year. Furthermore, with the implementation of these systems and structures such as TCIS, our Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) reports have shown a significant decrease in incidents. From 2016 -2017 to the 2017-2018 school year, there has been a 38% decrease in overall incidents. Through these programs, all adults get to know students very well and personalize their learning for each. Students demonstrate that they are aware of the positive behavior supports and expectations and earn privileges such as participation in dances, parties, trips, basketball games, cooking and art classes as a result. Counselors have been already been trained in Social Emotional Learning and have stated to collaborate with teachers to implement Social Emotional Literacy strategies including the mood meter, class charters and school wide targeted “feeling words” all of which students use to discuss their own and others feelings. For the 2018 -2019 school year, as we see decreases in behavioral incidents and an increase in SANDI Social Emotional scores, we would like to see more students participate in vocational and transitional services. This past school year, we had the following: Students who participated in regular off campus work-sites: 33/309= 10.68% Students who participated in vocational activities and programs on site or in community sites: 100% Total percentage of students participating in vocational activities: 100% 3  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year P12X will increase the number of students participating in vocational and transitional opportunities off campus from 10% to 15% in order to obtain the skills necessary to reach their individual levels of independence as measured by monthly CIP Data. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Social Emotional Learning Standards training for all counselors to support IEP goal writing Counselors October 2018 Administration, Transition Team Structured biweekly student OORs data progress analysis with debrief with Counselors, Deans, Work-site Teachers, paraprofessionals and administration to assess decrease in overall incidents Teachers, Paraprofessionals, October 2018 - June 2019 Related service providers (bi-monthly) Teachers, IEP Training and Support "Clinics" for all staff once a month to ensure fidelity of IEP completion. Structured biweekly student OORs data progress analysis with debrief with Counselors, Deans, Work-site Teachers, paraprofessionals and administration to assess increase student individual levels of independence. Paraprofessionals, Related service providers Teachers, Paraprofessionals, October 2018 -April 2019 During extended day October 2018 - June 2019 Related service providers (bi-monthly) Teachers Paraprofessionals Instructional Support Coordinators, Transition Team, Data Specialist, Administration Admin team, Transition team, Promise team Teachers Paraprofessionals Instructional Support Coordinators, Transition Team, Data Specialist, Administration 5  Transition Workshop to support IEP transition goals for students. Teachers, September 2018 Admin team, Related service providers, Parents Teachers Transition Team, Job Developer Administration, Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 (bi-monthly) Work-site Teachers and paraprofessionals will participate in bimonthly data analysis of student skills to ascertain work rotations 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will host parent workshops for engaging students in supporting student instructional goals and techniques to improve reading.The school will also host a Parent Welcome/Open House/Curriculum Day to introduce administration/teachers related service providers and curriculum Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. · District Coach to support teachers in Emotional Literacy Standards · Schedule to provide Progress Monitoring Fridays for all classroom teachers · Job Developer will acquire more work sites and vocational opportunities for students · New Teacher Orientation to PBIS, Transition services and IEP planning · District Coach to support Transition Team and Job Developer · Teachers will participate in professional development opportunities provided by school and District 75 · IEP professional development opportunities for all classroom teachers . Linkage to community agencies/programs 6  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 there will be 5% increase in the number of students participating vocational and transitional services off-campus. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IEP Progress Reports Student Monthly Attendance Monthly CIP Data Attainments Transition Curriculum Pre and Post Assessment Data Monthly Vocational and Transition Referral Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Administration and staff reviewed PPO feedback, results of the Superintendent walk-throughs along with relevant school based data like End of the Year Performance Task Assessment ; student’s and teacher’s responses to internal surveys, student’s attendance trends and review of agendas and work product from 2018-2019 grade team meetings. After an analysis of this data, it became clear that grade team meetings and collaboration among teachers/staff allowed for greater cohesiveness, which helped to positively impact student achievement. Although the school’s schedule allowed for common planning time for grade teams, there wasn’t an effective cohesive protocol for looking at students’ work. The on boarding of new staff and the remaining inconsistencies among current staff offers specific enough actionable feedback to provide clear next steps for improvement and achievement. Also, during Professional Inquiry meetings it was noted that students made progress and improved in the area of student writing. Based on the focus for the year which included improving the structure of reading and writing as there were school wide gaps based on our Spring 2018 MOSL and Fall 2017 FAST scores. Teachers across the grades worked to provide instruction that targeted the structure of writing and reading comprehension. Through the next few months our teachers created and chose grade level uniform standards which helped the students better understand what is expected of them in order to be a good writer. As the area of writing continued to be addressed the students were being exposed to more literature which increased their reading levels by varying amounts. Student achievement data, as well as teacher ADVANCE data, and student IEP progress monitoring indicated that our 12:1:1 and 8:1:1 populations of alternately assessed students were generally not performing at a level that satisfied the expectations outlined by the Framework for Great Schools, specifically; Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, and Supportive Environment. The data indicated that students were held to different expectations in different settings and, at times, the expectations were too low. Instructional walk-through’s and Professional Learning Community feedback and data showed that instruction was not customized to specific student need and ability or inclusive of all learners. Student performance data from 2016-17 SANDI, showed that students were not consistently engaged in ambitious intellectual activity where they had the opportunity to develop critical thinking skills. We discovered that in order to be effective and impactful, we needed to establish a classroom and school culture where students are challenged by their teachers and peers in a safe and supported environment. Although many teachers were committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and school, the inclusive school community needed to learn ways to customize instruction, empower students with disabilities and develop rigorous instruction and thinking that promotes career readiness in order to meet higher expectations. We have hypothesized that the root cause of our problem of practice was a lack of effective teacher collaboration, a lack of content specialty and a lack of exposure to a general education setting. 8  In order to address this problem, as a collaborative community, we began to explore the idea of departmentalization. Through inquiry we decided that by departmentalizing our 12:1:1 and 8:1:1 classes, students would have the opportunity to participate in an equitable school experience to that of general education students. Students would participate in content specific classrooms, rather than self-contained classrooms. Teachers would have the opportunity to refine their practice under a specific content focus and their professional learning communities would grow to serve common students as well as common content, providing teachers the opportunity to share best practices and modify their pedagogy by looking at student work with a common inquiry focus. We will develop flexible scheduling so that each departmentalized quad, triad or pair has a common PLC as well as a common prep period. Each quad/pair/triad needs to be scheduled in a manner that will support transitions and provide a homeroom class. We will diversify as well as modify the practices of our Professional Learning Communities in order to more effectively impact student achievement and increase rigor across all environments. As a school community, we adopted a new PLC Framework, which outlined our school’s commitment to immersive learning and reflective practices in order to impact student learning and progress. New learning communities formed based on the departmentalization will meet three times per week, two times a week to participate in Looking At Student Work (LASW) inquiry in their departmentalized quads/pairs and one time per week to develop their pedagogy and differentiate instruction within their content area. A period a week teachers will participate in trans-disciplinary meetings to develop and discuss the IEP’s of the students they support. Strengths: Teacher’s lead PDs. School schedule that allows for daily common planning time. Culturally Relevant and Responsive Events including students and staff. Staff has created a strong environment of trust. Teachers eagerly work collaboratively during Professional Leaning to learn about Rigor, Questioning and RtI Teacher created curriculum based on best practices Inquiry teams meet monthly to discuss student progress; identify strengths and areas of improvement, common trends and implications for teacher practice Priority area: Creation of teacher teams who drive key decisions around student achievement . Review and revision of school wide protocols for looking at student work and curriculum design. Further increase students’ writing proficiency, and reading levels through continued progress monitoring through the use of baseline, formative and summative assessments. As well as classroom assignments. Increase teacher Professional development surrounding Domain 3 B Diversify as well as modify the practices of our Professional Learning Communities Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 9  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will be engaged in collaborative teacher teams in order to increase student communication outcomes as measured by SANDI scores. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Review and revise grade and department teams and scheduling to improve the collaborative process of looking at student work. Diversify as well as modify the practices of our Professional Learning Communities in order to more effectively impact student achievement and increase rigor across all environments by using a protocol/tool where content teams will be focused on lesson plan tuning, the tuning of tasks for students and identifying subject specific attainments for each semester. Curriculum teams will be focused on identifying common school-wide skills, the development of assessments and assessment calendars and inquiry around student work. Provide Professional Development opportunities around how to look at student work and how to make data based decisions Develop protocols, and common language around mastery based grading, rubrics, etc. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Whole School October 2018-June 2019 Whole School October 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams/Administration team Teacher teams/Administration team Whole School October 2018-June 2019 Instructional cabinet and Lead teachers October 2018-June 2019 Teacher teams/Administration team Administration team Lead Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. P12X works to engage and inform families of our students, knowing that their participation is vital to the generalization of new skills across environments. With this in mind, our expert speech providers, verbal behavior teachers and coaches, in conjunction with our parent coordinator, PA members, and assistant principals, will plan and implement parent workshops specific to supporting acquired skills at home and in the community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 1  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Principal Assistant Principals Programmer Per session funding Instructional Resources: Data Team PD Training Schedule Adjustments Strategic scheduling to allow for inquiry work among staff which targets effective implementation of specific learned strategies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All stakeholders involved will review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan as necessary during the following benchmarking periods: October 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019 as well as during the 4 scheduled marking periods. quantifiable mid-point benchmark that will be used On February 15, 2019 there will also be mid-point bench-mark review conducted to measure the school’s progress towards meeting the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MYON data, Wilson data, SANDI/FAST data will be reviewed to measure progress towards meeting goals as well as ADVANCE data (Domain 3B & 3D). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. An analysis of school’s school year 2017-2018 Quality Review, school year 2017-2018 PPO feedback, ADVANCE data and teacher’s final ADVANCE scores reveal that although teachers at P12X are currently using inventive teaching, questioning and discussion strategies and protocols, there are still inconsistencies around teacher practice, curriculum unit plan development. This analysis of data yielded information that also revealed that teachers at P12X also had uneven student engagement, participation, and critical thinking during instructional time. Additionally, further evidence supports the work taking place in the school, shows students are provided customized curriculum and assessment practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Instructional Cabinet will establish structures and processes to engage at least 90% of teachers in professional development in order to cultivate higher level of student engagement and assessment in class according to our Theory of Action. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Instructional Rounds will be implemented. Teacher Teams will plan, observe & debrief lessons with a focus. Professional Development around curriculum and unit and pedagogy; with a focus on Danielson 3B & 3D Frequent observation with timely feedback with a particular focus on Danielson 3B & 3D which is an essential component of rigorous instruction and a key component of the rubrics we are developing. Whole Staff October Administrative team 2018-June 2019 Whole Staff October Administrative team 2018-June 2019 Review, revision and further implementation of DOK and sentence stems and questioning template. Whole Staff October 2018-June 2019 Administrative team and teacher leaders. Inter-visitations among staff with a particular focus on Danielson 3B & 3D Whole Staff November 2018-June 2019 Whole Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Implement literacy based parental workshops as part of the Saturday Academy to promote parent leadership and engagement support at home: 10/14/18 11/18/18 12/9/18 01/20/19 02/10/19 03/10/19 04/21/19 05/12/19 4  06/02/19 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. HUMAN RESOURCES -The Administrative Team will assist the teachers to develop professional growth plans and schedule professional learning opportunities INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES -Instructional materials to implement strategies SCHEDULE ADJUSTMENTS -The Administrative Team will schedule time for teachers to meet in PLC Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019 the administration will have conducted weekly cabinet discussions surrounding ADVANCE snapshots. Discussions will include Lead teachers; surrounding strengths and needs that are being seen in individual classes, grades and school wide. Periodic data analysis will be completed at the completion of each observation cycle to provide informative data and actionable feedback to teachers. On February 15, 2018 benchmark that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE snapshots, Student formative and summative data will be reviewed to measure progress towards meeting goals. By January 31, 2019, a checklist for progress monitoring of goals will have been implemented to demonstrate that 50% of the goal has been achieved. 1. Bi-monthly, Administrators will meet lead teachers to discuss supports provided to teachers. 2. Weekly Cabinet will allow Administrators the opportunity to discuss professional learning and teacher progress and plan for next steps. 3. Post-observation and informal conferences will afford Administrators the opportunity to confer with teachers and collaborate on improving and adjusting teacher practice. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. On our 2017-2018 Learning Survey, 91% of parents were satisfied with our Instructional Core, over 90% were satisfied with our Systems for Improvement, and our School Culture. We would like to increase our response rate so that more parent voices are heard. In addition, supporting evidence in our 2014-2015 Quality Reviewer noted teachers use the Extended Day on Tuesdays to exclusively communicate student progress with parents and share with them success stories about their children. Additionally, ongoing feedback to families is given is also given via phone calls, letters, emails and through Remind our online Parent Information System, for which parents have access as well as the school website. However, we have had very limited special events for parents to keep them continually engaged in the school community. We need to increase the level of interaction with parents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 parent participation will increase by 10% as evidenced by the number of parents who attend an event within our school that is logged into the PCAR system. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement a minimum of two parent workshops during the fall semester, such as literacy in the home, Multi-cultural night, supporting communication, transition, ENL, etc. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents November 1, 2018 Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Develop a monthly newsletter that is sent home to parents and families. We will mail each newsletter by the first of the month starting in October 2018 and ending on June 5, 2019 and continued updating of website. Parents October 1, 2018 to June 5, 2019 Develop an email database of parent emails for frequent communication (e.g. Remind) Parents November 1, 2018 Parent Coordinator Implement a minimum of one parent workshop per month based upon parent interest to provide opportunities for families to engage with outside agencies (IYahoo, FDNY, Guardianship, Include NYC, etc. ) Parents Implement a minimum of one parent coordinator "Sip and Chat" parent meeting where parents meet in a non-judgmental camaraderie manner with each other Parents Implement a minimum of one weekend parent child workshop per month based upon family interest to engage families with outside community based partners for parent and child arts educational activities Parents Implement a minimum of one meeting with the principal (breakfast, lunch, or dinner) workshop per month based upon parent interest to answer parental questions or concerns. Parents October 1, 2018 to June 5, 2019 October 1, 2018 to June 5, 2019 October 1, 2018 to June 5, 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent Coordinator Principal Assistant Principal October 1, 2018 to June 5, 2019 Parent Coordinator Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. OPWDD, FDNY, YAI, IYAHOO, ADAPT, etc are some of the community based organizations/partnerships that will be utilized to support this family and community engagement goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The use of human resources, instructional resources, per session, per diem, and schedule adjustments will be utilized to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. On October 1, 2018, the Principal and Parent Coordinator will meet to ensure that our first Parent Newsletter has been developed and sent to families, and ensure that the two parent workshops are scheduled. Also, on February 15, 2019 the Principal and Parent Coordinator will have a mid-point benchmark to assess the school's progress toward meeting the school's goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mini learning environment surveys will be conducted throughout the year to gauge what topics parents would like to have as workshops will be used as instruments to measure to assess progress to meet this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) SANDI, FAST, Wilson Mathematics SANDI, FAST Science SANDI, FAST Social Studies SANDI, FAST, Wilson SANDI, FAST, Wilson At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Interactive writing, Teachers & Writers Collaborative, Thinking Maps Interactive writing, Teachers & Writers Collaborative, Thinking Maps Interactive writing, Teachers & Writers Collaborative, Thinking Maps Interactive writing, Teachers & Writers Collaborative, Thinking Maps Interactive writing, Teachers & Writers Collaborative, Thinking Maps Small group, one-to -one During the school day Small group, one-to -one During the school day Small group, one-to -one During the school day Small group, one-to -one During the school day Small group, one-to -one During the school day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 39 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  To aid students in temporary housing, during the 2018-2019 school year, P12X will be providing backpacks filled with supplementary educational books. Also, we will be providing clothing, food and metro cards for travel. Additionally, we will be providing student mentorship 1 day per week for two hours for two groups ran simultaneously, Pep Rally, College Awareness Workshops for grades 6-12 , and 4 College Trips based upon student interests. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $41, 078 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. n/a 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). n/a Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. n/a 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 3  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Lewis and Clark School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the ESSA, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Lewis and Clark School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Lewis and Clark School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 7  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 8  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 9  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 0  ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: In order to best service our ELL population, who are classified as having Autism, an Intellectual Disability, Emotional Disturbance and various Learning Disabilities such as ADHD, we will provide an after school program that will help our students to continue to practice the material they learn in class during the day. The name of this program will be the Mr. A+ Information Technology Certification Program and we are targeting primarily our students in 12:1:1 classes who are scoring at the Entering and Emerging level on the 2018 NYSESLAT. The reason for this decision is that we hope to help these students score at the Transitioning level on the 2019 NYSESLAT. We plan to invite 12 students from 12:1:1 classes. This after school program will be conducted in English by our certified ENL teacher named Victor Abruzzese and with support in the native language by an appropriate bilingual para. The language of instruction will be English. Given the nature of the disabilities mentioned above, our students need constant repetition and reinforcement in order to retain information; therefore, our after school program will incorporate the use of the academic vocabulary used during the regular school day. The students will use iPads to access a teacher made website that will allow them to complete tasks online that tie into the schools mission to help students achieve independent living and thinking skills. Some of these tasks will be: role playing professional scenes to help them prepare for their transition into the workplace, completing a survey by accesing a link, creating videos that incorporate academic vocabulary, finding multimedia clips that relate to the lesson, or watching a video that relates to the lesson and then answering questions about it. The teacher will make supplementary videos along with the students using an HD video camera or iPad of classroom assignments and add them to the teacher made website for easy access by students. Also, the teacher will use iBooks Author (a free software program) to create materials that can be accessed through iBooks on the iPads. In order to manage all of these technologically based tasks, an iMac will be used to keep the iPads synched and updated with the latest software. The iMac is also necessary to manage all of the video content, and the use of iBooks Author requires an iMac in order to publish books that can be accessed through iBooks on the iPad. Additionally, five new iPads will be purchased to replace outdated technology. Furthermore, the students will soon be transitioning out of high school and into various work programs, and some will also be transitioning into community colleges. In order to accomplish these goals, the students need to learn how to do the following tasks: fill out forms online; research the internet for job openings; keep information organized in files and folders; track data; manage their time by using a calendar that provides audible prompts; use technology to control other devices, such as projectors and monitors; keep audio and video records; print documents; upload and download information from the internet; install updates onto their computer; read, write and send emails; etc. At the end of the program, the students will complete a practicum exam where they will demonstrate mastery of the above mentioned basic skills and they will receive a Certificate of Completion as well during our end of the year ceremony. The program will cover the following 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information standards: Common Core Writing Standards for Grades 9, 10, and 111. Write arguments to support claims in an analysis of substantive topics or texts, using valid reasoning and relevant and sufficient evidence. Explore and inquire into areas of interest to formulate an argument.a. Introduce precise claim(s), distinguish the claim(s) from alternate or opposing claims, and create an organization that establishes clear relationships among claim(s), counterclaims, reasons, and evidence.b. Develop claim(s) and counterclaims fairly, supplying evidence for each while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both in a manner that anticipates the audience’s knowledge level and concerns.c. Use words, phrases, and clauses to link the major sections of the text, create cohesion, and clarify the relationships between claim(s) and reasons, between reasons and evidence, and between claim(s) and counterclaims.d. Establish and maintain a formal style and objective tone while attending to the norms and conventions of the discipline in which they are writing.e. Provide a concluding statement or section that follows from and supports the argument presented.2. Write informative/explanatory texts to examine and convey complex ideas, concepts, and information clearly and accurately through the effective selection, organization, and analysis of content.a. Introduce a topic; organize complex ideas, concepts, and information to make important connections and distinctions; include formatting (e.g., headings), graphics (e.g., figures, tables), and multimedia when useful to aiding comprehension.b. Develop the topic with well-chosen, relevant, and sufficient facts, extended definitions, concrete details, quotations, or other information and examples appropriate to the audience’s knowledge of the topic.c. Use appropriate and varied transitions to link the major sections of the text, create cohesion, and clarify the relationships among complex ideas and concepts.d. Use precise language and domain-specific vocabulary to manage the complexity of the topic.e. Establish and maintain a formal style and objective tone while attending to the norms and conventions of the discipline in which they are writing.f. Provide a concluding statement or section that follows from and supports the information or explanation presented (e.g., articulating implications or the significance of the topic). Bilingual Progressions The bilingual progression we plan to focus on is moving students from the emerging to the transitioning level in reading. EmergingOrganize preidentified words and phrases on an inferences and evidence graphic organizer to draw inferences from the text and cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support them. TransitioningOrganize phrases and sentences on a partially completed inferences and evidence graphic organizer to draw inferences from the text and cite strong and thorough textual evidence to support them. Types of Materials:We plan to purchase five iPads for this program. The use of the iPads will help integrate our students into the modern world of technology, a world they often don’t have access to because of their socio-economic conditions. Our after school program will help prepare our students to transition into the world of work and commerce by teaching students the real world tasks of using and logging into a website, accessing documents online, uploading and downloading documents, pictures and other files, and maintaining an online portfolio that they can access from anywhere, as well as making videos with a video camera and printing informational materials in color. According to an article titled Why iPads Make Great Gifts for Kids with LD in the December 2010 LD OnLine Newsletter, “As technology improves, so do the educational options for students with disabilities. Parents and schools should consider investing in Smartphones and tablet computers to make learning accessible and fun.” Furthermore, in an article published online on October 12, 2011 on the Education Week website www.edweek.org by Francesca Duffy, it states that finding the right technology to match a student's disability 'can be an ordeal', but that 'One key is to ensure you understand the student's challenges first, and then to match the right technology to his or her needs.' One of the major challenges for our students is their persistent lack of organizational skills, which has been influenced by the unstable environments they come from, such as ADHD, Autism, various learning disabilities, as well as incarceration, multiple foster home assignments, and long stays in residential treatment facilities. The use of iPads to access an online portfolio will ameliorate this problem for them by serving as a tool to help them manage and organize 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information their academic work. Subgroups and Grade Levels to be Served: Many of the students from last year's program have already expressed an interest in participating in the program again this year. These students, as well as the new attendees which we plan to invite, are scoring primarily at the entering and emerging level, but some are on the transitioning level on the NYSESLAT and are in high school (grades 9 to 11). Schedule and Duration The sessions will be held on Wednesdays and Thursdays, and they will begin at 2:30 pm and end at 4:30 pm. These sessions begin at 2:30 because the school day ends at 2:20 on Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays. The sessions will be conducted by a certified ENL teacher (Victor Abruzzese), and a paraprofessional. A supervisor will also be available and will be paid for one hour from Title III money (The supervisor will be paid from 3:31 pm to 4:31 pm). The program will begin in February 2019 and continue until June 2019 for a total of 26 sessions lasting two hours each. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Title III program at P12X will also provide 7 sessions of professional development for 1 hour each, from 2:30 pm to 3:30 pm on Fridays. These sessions begin at 2:30 because the school day ends at 2:20 on Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from February 2019 to April 2019. These PDs will align with our Title III program by providing teachers exposure to the latest technolgies which will help them deliver instruction in the classroom. The topics for these 7 sessions will be 1. What is BICS vs CALP? 2. What is the difference between Academic Vocabulary and Content Area vocabulary? 3. How many words do I need to learn in order to speak a new language? 4. What are the different types of scaffolding through technology used with ELL students? 5. How do the Common Core Standards, technology, and the English Language Learner all fit together? 6. What is the role of technology in the content area classroom? 7. Wrap-up, Review, and Next Steps. The format of these PD sessions will be a collaborative discussion among the presenter and the teachers, utilizing questions provided in advance of the sessions. These PD sessions will take place each month throughout the program (February through May) beginning one week before the start of the program. The sessions will be taught by the certified ENL teacher, Victor Abruzzese, who will discuss with the participants the needs of ELLs to learn how to do the following tasks: fill out forms online; research the internet for job openings; keep information organized in files and folders; track data; manage their time by using a calendar that provides audible prompts; use technology to control other devices, such as projectors and monitors; keep audio and video records; print documents; upload and download information from the internet; install updates onto their computer; read, write and send emails; etc. The PD sessions will be for 1 member of each of the departments of science, math, social studies, and ELA (4 total) and they will be paid the trainee rate. A supervisor will be present but will not need to be paid from Title III funds as they are already on duty until 3:30. A paraprofessional will also be included and will be paid from 2:30 pm to 3:30 pm. The purpose of these trainee sessions is to reinforce the idea that teaching academic vocabulary across the content areas helps reinforce the retention of the academic vocabulary the students learn. The PD sessions will also be aligned to the purpose of the after school program in that content will be delivered using the iPads and utilizing the Finalcut pro software and the iBooks Author 5  Part C: Professional Development software. The rationale for this program is that content area teachers currently teach content specific vocabulary, but they do not have a supplemental program that teaches high frequency academic vocabulary words that are often found in complex texts used across the curriculum and referred to in the Common Core Standards. Also, the content area teachers mainly rely on regular textbooks to deliver material. The ENL teacher will be introducing these teachers to the high frequency academic vocabulary that is associated with the development of CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency), which our ELLs have trouble with. He will do this by providing them with lists of words from the series Vocabulary Power 1, 2, and 3 from Pearson/Longman. The ENL teacher will also introduce the use of iBooks Author to create iBooks that can adapt and deliver content, and that can be viewed on the iPads. It is our plan that these teachers would then turnkey the information to all content area teachers. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Title III program will also involve parents by providing two Saturday workshops. There will be one workshop at the beginning of the program in February, and one at the end in April. The workshops will be two hours long beginning at 9:00 AM on Saturday to 11:00 AM. The primary provider of the workshops will be Marquis Studios and the ENL teacher will assist. Marquis Studios provides arts education to at risk and special needs students. As many ELL parents do not usually attend these types of workshops, the ENL teacher will be there to assist them to access this valuable resource for them and their children. The role of the ENL teacher will be to make the content accessible by providing language support for the parents. Additionally, there will be a paraprofessional present to provide further support. Both the ENL teacher and the paraprofessional speak Spanish and will be able to provide additional help in the parents native language. A supervisor will also be present to answer any questions and provide additional support and will be paid from 9:00 am to 11:00 am. Refreshments will also be provided. The parent component of our Title III program at P12X will focus on skills for effective communication in English during what the parents might encounter in their interactions in professional settings, but it will have more of a focus on effective communication skills and practical strategies for various other situations, such as job interviews, court appearances, adult education classes, and medical visits. The workshops for the parents will also address best practices in ENL as they are not native English speakers and it will be aligned with the goal of our Title III program, which is learning professional and formal communication skills. The adult program will focus on using professional language in context for this reason. They will also have access to video content created using the Finalcut Pro software to give them additional support. These videos will tie into the content of the workshops and they will be posted on the teacher made website www.niceink.org. 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Parents will be notified of the Title III program in writing in November of 2018. The information will also be translated into Spanish and other languages as needed. Follow-up calls will be made as needed. In addition, all Title III parents will be invited to work alongside their children during our Wednesday/Thursday program, which will be at no cost to the Title III budget. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount $2,475.00 $5.21 5 iPads x $495 = $2,475.00 Labels for the iPads 7 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Student Program 1 ENL teacher x 26 sessions x 2 hrs x $60.65 = $3,153.80 1 paraprofessional x 26 sessions x 2 hrs x $34.73 = $1,805.96 1 supervisor (AP) x 26 sessions x 1 hrs (3:31 pm to 4:31 pm) x $63.45 = $1,649.70 Professional Development Program1 ENL teacher x 7 sessions x 1 hr x $60.65 = $424.55 4 Content Area Teachers x 7 x 1hr x $27.62 = $773.36 1 paraprofessional x 7 sessions x 1 hr x $34.73 = $243.11 Professional Salaries for Parent Program. 1 ENL teacher x 2 sessions x 2 hrs x $60.65 = $242.60 1 paraprofessional x 2 sessions x 2 hrs x $34.73 = $138.92 1 supervisor (AP) x 2 session x 2 hrs (9:00 pm to 11:00 pm) x $63.45 = $253.80 2 Saturday workshops done by Marquis Studio: 2 X $450 e ach = $900.00 (for parent engagement) Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $8,685.80  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff $900.00 and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula,  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) $299.99 Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 $12,366.00 $299.99 Finalcut Pro software (for parent engagement) 0 0 $12,366.00 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name Lewis and Clark School Borough Bronx School Number 12 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Kuvana Jones Coach none ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Victor Abruzzese Teacher/Subject Area none Teacher/Subject Area Steven Santacroce / Classroom Related-Service Provider none Superintendent none Assistant Principal Rebecca Schropfer Coach none School Counselor Luis Ramos - Bil. SW Parent Eduarda Polanco Parent Coordinator Wendy Camarena Field Support Center Staff Member none Other (Name and Title) none C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 309 Total number of ELLs 102 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.01% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school currently uses SANDI and Fast as a school wide assessment for all students. For our ENL students we plan to focus on the Communication Development section of this test. The ENL teachers also use teacher made assessments which utilize rubrics to determine student proficiency levels. The data from these assessments show that students are functioning at mostly the emerging level of proficiency in the English Language. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The P12X ENL teacher will meet regularly with school based teams to: 0  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate student progress based on various factors. We will be using the ELL periodic assessment speaking test to be administered in the fall in order to establish a baseline level. We will then give this assessment again in the Spring to adjust instruction. Additionally, We will We look for an increase in student participation as demonstrated by teacher evaluations of project based lessons using a school-wide rubric that also looks at language development. We also look for an increase in ther CALP (Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency) development as demonstrated by the use of academic vocabulary in their work. We also look at SANDI scores to check for English language development. And finally we look for progress in the four modalities of the NYSESLAT. In particular however, we will use the speaking portion of the ELL Periodic Assessment in the fall and in the spring to determine a baseline a follow growth. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At P12x the ENL teacher will: 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Currently, 12X serves ELLs in grades 6-12. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The NYSESLAT scores show the following trends: NYSESLAT 2015 NYSESLAT 2016 NYSESLAT 2017 1 Entering 67 24 25 2 Emerging 11 54 49 3 Transitioning 1 17 21 4 Expanding 2 1 2 5 Commanding 0 0 0 As you can see we have 21 students scoring at the transitioning level. These students will be targeted for consideration to inclusion classrooms whenever applicable. Also, of the 49 students scoring at the Emerging level, 24 are considered high emerging meaning there total score is within five points of the low score of 30 at the transitioning level. These students will be targeted to see if they can show progress and move into the transitioning level. The ENL teacher will focus more on teaching 1  phrases and clauses that will expand the students sentence structures. Also, the ENL teacher will provide these students with an opportunity to give extended oral responses so that they can demonstrate their ability to give expanded responses when speaking. Also, the data from the LAP analysis tool supports this decision. According to the data from this report, 48 out of 91 test takers advanced one proficiency, and 9 out of 91 advanced two proficiency levels. Since about half of the 49 students scored at the high emerging level, it makes sense to group them accordingly. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL teacher gives PDs (at least twice per year in the fall and spring). We also have a parent orientation meeting usually in the winter. Additionally, parents are welcomed to come to the school during our extended day Tuesdays from 2:30 to 3:30 to discuss their children on an individual basis. Parents are informed of these meetings via letter and/or telephone call. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The instructional model used is a mix of integrated co-teaching model along with some stand-alone classes taught by the certified ENL teachers. A schedule is created at the beginning of the year in collaboration with the classroom teachers and content area teachers which provides all students with a maximum number of minutes allowable of integrated co-teaching and stand-alone ENL as per the new CR Part 154 requirements. Our free-standing ENL consists of groups of students who are brought to a separate location in which they receive more targeted instruction. Also, students are grouped based on student need and NYSESLAT levels to facilitate meeting the required number of minutes as per CR Part 154. In the group composition list in Google Drive, the students are placed in groups that account for their grade levels and the number of minutes they require service as per their NYSESLAT scores. ELL students also receive additional support provided by a certified bilingual classroom teacher, who teaches a class comprised of bilingual and ENL students. Furthermore, instruction will occur in collaboration with content area teachers. The ENL teacher will meet formally during common preps and informally on a regular basis with content area teachers in order to align the ENL program with content area instruction and the Common Core Learning Standards, create content specific vocabulary lists, and identify topics related to content area classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently, P12X features only a freestanding ENL program. c. DL program. If applicable. Currently, P12X features only a freestanding ENL Program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? A schedule is created at the beginning of the year based on the NYSESLAT results to determine the number of minutes for each student based on their proficiency levels. All students at the middle school level scored at the entering proficiency level so they were scheduled to receive as best as possible 1 unit of integrated ENL and 1 unit of standalone ENL. Overall, 49 students scored at the Emerging level in 2017 and 21 students scored at the transitioning level. Also, there was an increase in the number of students scoring at the transitioning level from 17 in 2016 to 21 in 2017. These results are used to group the students according to need. These students will be programmed to provide the with the maximum number of minutes possible given the schedule and the number of ENL teachers we have. 2  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At the high school level, all students will receive standards-based content area instruction in English using ENL strategies and methodologies. Also, ELL students will be grouped whenever possible to maximize time and ensure that students receive their mandated minutes. The model used is mostly an integrated ENL program along with some stand-alone ENL instruction. The ELLs are grouped whenever possible to facilitate programming their schedules and working with them as a small group within a class during the push-in periods. Additionally, the ENL teacher will provide academic vocabulary enrichment, consisting of Tier 2 and Tier 3 words (i.e. academic vocabulary and specialized content area vocabulary). Another component of the program is the use of extensive scaffolding and the use of the elements of Universal Design for Learning, which consists of presenting the subject matter in many different ways and re-visiting the content over the entire school year. The ENL teacher will also focus on developing writing skills by emphasizing the idea of writing as a process which will allow the student to revise writing projects multiple times. The program will be aligned to the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and the Common Core Learning Standards. The following books will be used for ENL instruction: "Vocabulary Power 1, 2, and 3", various scaffolded ELA books, as well as folk tales, fiction, and non-fiction. Technology will also be integrated to provide additional support using on-line reading programs and computer based journals. The activities that the ENL teacher will use include the use of learning experiences in the classroom, Language Experience, ESP (English for Specific Purpose) and cooperative learning to help develop the use of English in a social context. In order to facilitate the flow of comprehensible input and output, the ENL teacher will work with an ENL cohort in Integrated and Stand-Alone formats during various content area classes in collaboration with the content area teacher. Academic language will be developed through content-area instruction with ENL methodologies. Additionally, students will use bilingual glossaries in the various content areas to create bilingual word walls. During the transition period, they will be provided with 2 additional years of services. To ensure that students meet the standards and pass required state and local assessments, explicit ENL instruction follows the with New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and incorporates ENL strategies such as: Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience, cooperative learning, and various forms of scaffolding such as schema building through pre-text discussions, modeling, text re-presentation, metacognitive development, contextualization, and bridging. Explicit ELA instruction for ELLs follows the uniform curriculum, the common core standards, and the Balanced Literacy Program. The use of software enhances and supports the development of English literacy. Activities are extended throughout the curriculum and subject areas by combining the interdisciplinary/thematic approach with Language Experience, multi-sensory approaches, Cooperative Learning, infusion of the Arts and the use of technology. The classroom library contains books in English and the native language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? P012X school currently features an ENL program, and our ELL students are evaluated in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We have 4 newcomers at this time (who arrived either in 2016 or 2017). For these newcomers we will provide tutoring, buddy system and a nurturing environment to facilitate language production in addition to incorporating ENL strategies across the 3  content areas. Students at P12X from 4 to 6 years and 6 or more years will receive AIS. We have 7 SIFE students at this time and we will provide them with the following: ENL instruction that follows the the New Language Arts Progressions (NLAP) and the Common Core Learning Standards and incorporates ENL strategies such as: Total Physical Response (TPR), Language Experience, Cooperative Learning, and Graphic Organizers. Long Term ELLs will receive tutoring from teachers, academic and emotional support from buddy students and paraprofessionals. The school will continue to provide services until the student scores proficient on the NYSESLAT and their IEP changes to reflect they are eligible to at least 90 min of instruction. Students who reach the proficient/commanding level are entitled to at least a half unit of integrated ENL support. Also, long term ELLs will receive more explicit instruction in standard English forms. Former ELLs will receive at least one half of one unit of study of English as a New Language and will be eligible for certain specified testing accomodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers at P12X use the Attainment curriculum which provides different levels of the same text which benefit both ELLs and SWDs. Additionally, the ENL teachers create materials that target a range of student abilities by allowing students to answer using their preferred method of response, whether it be written, visual, responding verbally or kinesthetically, etc. Another instructional strategy used to help ELLs in the classroom is the use of grouping with a Native Langiuage Para to make the core content more accesible. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers at P12X use the Attainment curriculum which provides different levels of the same text to benefit both ELLs and SWDs. This curriculum along with SANDI provide IEP goals which the ENL teacher uses to help plan instruction. Additionally, the ENL teachers create materials that target a range of student abilities by allowing students to answer using their preferred method of response, whether it be written, visual, responding verbally or kinesthetically etc. Also, ENL students are identified and programmed in order to accommodate the maximum number of minutes possible. Within each class students are grouped to maximize their potential for learning. And, ENL teachers work collaboratively with classroom teachers and content area teachers to plan instruction and to find ways to infuse ENL strategies into content area instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At the middle and high school levels, we use the UNIQUE curriculum which provides different levels of the same text. This curriculum covers ELA, Science and Social Studies. For math, the ENL teacher collaborates with the math teacher to provide integrated instruction in the classroom. Additionally, at the high school level, the primary program used for targeted intervention is the series Vocabulary Power: Practicing Essential Words by Pearson and Longman. This program offers a research based approach to teaching academic vocabulary. The series provides three texts, Vocabulary Power 1, 2, and 3 that contain high frequency academic vocabulary words that are found in complex texts across all content area which are often referred to in the Common Core Learning Standards. Additionally, bilingual glossaries will be provided to all content area teachers, including but not limited to Math, Social Studies, Science, American History, Global History, and Art. Furthermore, we have an AIS program for math, social studies and science. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A new program under consideration is the use of voice recorders and video equipment to record role plays in the English language. Additionally, we have an after school program that uses technology and incorporates the academic vocabulary they encounter in the regular program. The plan is to incorporate more video to help them acquire the vocabulary and sentence structures learned during the day. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently, we do not plan to discontinue any programs or services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 4  We also offer programs throughout the school year for our students, such as CHAMPS for after school, our Title III after school program, school holiday events, parent workshops, talent shows and essay contests. ELLs and their parents/guardians are invited to these events through announcements in English, Spanish, and Bangla as these are the predominant languages at P12X. Additionally, students are always invited to perform, write or speak in their native language when appropriate. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The use of iPads to keep an electronic journal, as well as an online portfolio are used to help the students. Students also access a teacher made website to access various classroom assignments. We also use teacher made adapted books and various vocabulary building Apps across all levels. Furthermore, the ENL teacher makes extensive use of the Smartboard to help scaffold writing assignments by providing the students with a common text for them to use and interact with. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The use of the students native language is encouraged throughout the program where appropriate. When possible, students are grouped by home language to create a more supportive learning environment. ELL students whose IEPs recommend Bilingual instruction, receive language support from Alternate Placement paraprofessionals who speak the students' native language and English. Often iPads and the Smartboard are used to provide support in the home language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At the IEP meeting, The available services are discussed with the parent and the student is programmed for classes accordingly. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We plan to send an orientation letter to parents prior to the new school year with a list of items that they need to know about. If possible, new ELLs are invited to an orientation session in the fall. Also, new students are often given an orientation session by the ENL teacher and may also be paired with a student buddy to help them become accustomed to the new school environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, our school does not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, 12X only features an ENL program. 5  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? During the school year, P12X will hold professional development workshops that will teach ENL methodologies, strategies and approaches to all staff including paraprofessionals. These sessions will occur at various times of the year during our extended Monday PD sessions. These sessions will be conducted by the ENL teacher. The sessions will also include research in the field of ENL education. The school leadership will also refer teachers, guidance counselors, OT and PT staff, the school psychologist and the school social worker, as well as the speech therapists and the parent coordinator to appropriate staff development workshops conducted by various outside agencies including RBERN (Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network) to further assist in their development and understanding of the ELL population. Teachers will also be required to attend Jose P. workshops if necessary as they become available by the district, or maintain a record of the Jose P. training they have attended in their files. Our ENL teachers are currently attending professional development workshops conducted by the Office of English Language Learners at the district and PDs done by the Division of English Language Learners and Student Support (DELLSS) and they will be expected to attend sessions from other initiatives, e.g. the Universal Design for Learning workshops. Our teachers will also attend conferences focused on the education of ELLs provided by the New York State Department of Education. They will then turnkey this information during various in-house PDs for the staff at the school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We inform the staff at the beginning of the school year of the mandated number of professional development hours that they must complete. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teachers will schedule individual meetings with parents throughout the school year. At the time of the meeting, Language Translation and Interpretation sevices will be provided. These meeting will be offered during our Tuesday extended day time from 2:30 to 3:30. These meetings will be separate and apart from parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, quarterly progress meetings or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited to participate on the school leadership team by the parent coordinator. The common method of parental involvement is through individual meetings with teachers, counselors, and the SBST. Parent surveys are also done as well as mailings to all parents to inform them of new school initiatives. All informational materials are also translated into the home language. Additionally, an ELL parent workshop is scheduled by the first parent teacher conference night. Title III funds are also allocated for two parent workshops to be run by Marquis studios with the ENL teacher available to assist. Parents are also invited to participate in various school cultural activities such as our holiday show in the Winter and our school dance in the Spring. Translation and interpretation services will be provided as needed. 6  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. none 7 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dr. Kuvana Jones, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 8  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Lewis and Clark School School DBN: 75X012 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Kuvana Jones Title Principal Ms. Rebecca Schropfer Assistant Principal Ms. Wendy Camarena Parent Coordinator Mr. Victor Abruzzese ENL/Bilingual Teacher Eduarda Polanco Parent Steven Santacroce/Classroom Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Luis Ramos School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 06/28/17 9  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75X012 School Name: Lewis and Clark School Superintendent: K. Louissaint The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this Wendy Camarena Parent Coordinator conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to the demographics of the school in ATS, over 60% of the students come from households where the first language is not English, which means they potentially need translation and interpretation services. To accurately assess which families need translation and interpretation services, P12X will conduct a home language survey when new students enter the school to determine the parents’ preferred language of communication. This information will also be gathered from the students' blue cards. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 0 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Accoriding to ATS, all parents preferred mode of communication is English. However, we will provide translation and interpretation services for Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, as needed. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We will distribute the following documents in September: Annual handbooks, calendars, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school program information, general overview of student curriculum, and a letter from the school leadership. In the Spring we will distribute NYSESLAT announcement letters. Also, we will distribute announcements about special school events and a newsletter on an on-going basis. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 1  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Formal: parent-teacher conference nights on Nov. 10 and Mar. 11, a parent orientation meeting as scheduled in December, Title III meetings which will occur once in the fall and once in the Spring, graduation and other special events, annual reviews, annual yearly ENL progress meetings scheduled when parents are available on a monthly basis. Informal: random chance meetings when parents come in. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The school will comply with Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 in the following ways: 1. After completing the home language survey, parents will be provided with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services along with instructions on how to obtain these services. 2. A sign will be placed at the school entrance of each site in each of the covered languages indicating where to pick up a copy of the parent notification letter regarding translation and interpretation services, also known as Attachment A to Chancellor’s Regulation A-663. 3. A School Safety Team Meeting will be held to devise a plan for dealing with possible communication barriers to the school’s administrative offices. 2  4. The school will provide information in a non-covered language if the need should arise and the school will be responsive to parent requests regarding interpretation and translation services. 5. A hardcopy of the information on the Department’s website concerning the rights of parents to translation and interpretation services shall be made available in each of the covered languages at all sites. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator will conduct parent surveys and parent conferences in which we gather feedback on parents' needs as well as the quality and availability of services. 3 
