2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X029 School Name: P.S./M.S. 029 MELROSE SCHOOL Principal: DANIELLE PRESTO 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS/MS 29, The MelroseSchool 07X029 320700010029 Pre K-8 School Number (DBN): 758 CourtlandtAvenue, Bronx, New York, 10451 718-292-3785 718-292-3784 Phone Number: Danielle Presto Fax: dpresto@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Danielle Presto Dawn Campi Tiffany Quinones Tamieka Frierson Kristen Harrison NA NA NA District Information Geographical District: 07 Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Ave, Bronx, NY 10451 Superintendent’s Office Address: ralvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 Phone Number: 347-610-8122 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Bronx Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/ 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: (718) 828-7776; (718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Danielle Presto Dawn Campi Lyseida Cardona Rosie Rosado Kristen Harrison NA NA NA Lisa Tejeda TaimekaFrierson Daisy Cruz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) CeliceMaldonado Tiffany Quinnones Jeannette Pena Emily Quinones Parent Parent Member/ Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? We are a safe and challenging academic setting that welcomes all learners. We are a community with high expectations that supports success for everyone. This mission is reflected in the rich, hands-on, student-centered, and experiential learning experiences planned and offered to all. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Each year PS/MS 29, The Melrose School, welcomes nearly 800 students in grades 3-K to 8. We are located in the Melrose section of the Bronx and our school is a progressive learning community that reflects the diversity of our city. Outside partnerships during the 2018-2019 school year include Urban Dove, Hands in For Youth, Urban Advantage, PSAL, Bronx Partnership Project, Nos Quedamos, NYC Administration for Children's Services, NYPD 40th Precinct (Too Good for Drugs), and the Morris Heights Health Center. These partnerships were designed to provide expanded and experiential learning opportunities for our students, families, and staff thereby helping to support well-rounded learning experiences. Additionally, we continue to support the PBIS Framework and our Self-Respect, Hard work, Advocacy, Resilience and Empathy (S.H.A.R.E.) for Success community touchstone to encourage positive and uplifting social behaviors and character education. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We are a 3-K through grade 8 school. We serve a diverse population of students including, but not limited to, students with disabilities and ENL students. We serve approximately 800 students. Approximately 17% of our students have IEPs (Individualized Educational Plans). Specific needs: A well maintained and organized classroom that limits distractions; design of instruction broken down into smaller, more manageable tasks; provision of multi-sensory strategies; structured lessons that lead to successful results that keep students motivated . Considerations: Aligned to research-based best practices, we aim to integrate and mainstream all students with special needs into our general education population as regularly as possible and when appropriate. Utilizing Specially Designed Instruction and Universal Design for Learning, all students with disabilities have access to Common Core Standards. Approximately 17% of our students are ENL students (English as a New Language). Specific needs: Develop decoding skills with early, explicit, and intensive instruction in phonological awareness and phonics; provide increased opportunities to develop sophisticated vocabulary knowledge including strong academic language; present challenging narrative and expository texts to teach comprehension strategies; promote reading fluency with a focus on vocabulary and increased exposure to print; ensure that independent reading is structured and purposeful with effective reader-text match; provide opportunities to engage in structured, academic talk. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  Considerations: Aligned to research-based best practices, we aim to provide structured, well-managed classrooms with established routines, and posted daily schedules. In addition to specialized small group instruction, we support ENL student's social emotional and academic needs by providing consistent opportunities for peer collaboration both within and outside of the classroom setting. Additionally, we ensure ENL student's voice is heard through membership in student council. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School Progress Areas: Rigorous Instruction: Progress 2017 to 2018 as per the 2018 June Instructional Report 1) Grade 6 mathematics: Improvement = 8 percentiles 2) Grade 8 mathematics: Improvements = 6 percentiles 3) 3% overall increase in levels 3 & 4 (NYS ELA test ) in grades 3-8 4) 3% overall increase in levels 3 & 4 (NYS Math test ) in grades 3-8 Key areas of Focus 2018-2019 Effective Leadership: Supporting the Instructional Growth of Teachers A 3 year snapshot of progress in grades 3-8 as measured by the NYS ELA and Math test evidences a 1% total combined decrease in level 2 and a 5% total combined increase in level 3 & 4 (ELA) and a 2% total combined decrease in level 2 and a 6% increase in level 3 & 4 (Math). This does not evidence significant growth in proficiency rates over a 3 year span. This year's instructional focus (if we use data strategically to create targeted small group instruction, then every child will have a personalized learning path) requires a high level of support to elevate teacher's understanding of, and capacity to execute research-based best practices. The administrative team is fully committed to developing and delivering the following instructional and social-emotional support to drive student achievement  Equitable allocation of resources to support teacher capacity to deliver high quality standards-aligned instruction for all students  Continued partnership (year 3) with Teachers College Reading and Writing Program to model (co-planning/co-teaching/debriefing) an effective balanced literacy program  Continued partnership with NTN Math specialists in both the elementary and middle school to ensure a comprehensive vertical academic program  Ongoing collaboration with DataCorp to support data inquiry cycles/refinement of standards-aligned instruction  Creation of an equitable schedule to allow for teacher teams, department articulation, and vertical planning teams to confer weekly  Provision of differentiated learning opportunities to support individual teacher improvement  Collaboration with District 7 Teacher Leaders initiative to grow teacher practice in ELA and Mathematics  Ongoing Intervisitation opportunities (both internal and external) to gain insight on integrating research-based best practices  Access to colleague:colleague mentoring/support through the hire of a model teacher 2018-19 SCEP-P 12   Equitable opportunities to receive instructional support from internal Literacy Coach and ULIT Coach  Inclusion in the Algebra for All initiative leading to additional professional development opportunities for all teachers of mathematics 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X029 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 792 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 61 60 27 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 31 14 14 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 89.9% % Reduced Lunch 12.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 66.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.1 2% 36% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 17.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 49% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 109 107 90.1% 1.4% 20.2% 29.9% 1.5% 1.4% 4 13% 5.8 13.5% 0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths around this Element 1) According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (Online Edition), 92% of social studies/ science/ELA teachers say that they had the resources to include opportunities for reading and writing experiences grounded in evidence from text, both literary and informational; 89% of teachers said they had the resources to include opportunities for students to interact with academic language; 100% of math/science teachers say they had the resource to link the standards from previous grades to current grade so student knowledge/skills build onto previous learning as foundations for math concepts  During 2017-2018 school year, teachers engaged in a robust professional development cycle to identify resources necessary to meet the needs of all learners  Teacher inter and intra-visitations were encouraged and supported. These efforts were especially supported by TC coaching. Standards-aligned resources were made available so that students had the opportunity to engage with differentiated texts/multiple primary sources.  Teacher feedback was collected around ways to strengthen instructional practice across the school and teams were created to build teacher's capacity to lead such efforts 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Needs around this Element 1) According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot, 85% of students did not meet state standards in ELA and 89% of students did not meet standards in Math on the NYS exams with an average score of 2.2 in ELA and 2.1 in Math. 2) According to the 2018 June Instructional Report, 82% of students did not meet state standards in ELA as measured by the NYS exam and 86% of students did not meet state standards in math as measured by the NYS exam  Develop a comprehensive CCLS-aligned assessment plan with the purpose of monitoring progress (data analysis), adapting instruction and creating personalized learning paths for every student  Design a clear and focused RtI period to meet the CCLS-aligned instructional needs of all students  Adopt Universal Design for Learning (UDL) guidelines where all students have access to CCLS  Ensure vertical cohesion of curricula to support a rigorous CCLS-aligned learning experience  Promote student choice, accountability and ownership through rich student-led academic discourse/debate  Encourage flexible and individualized CCLS-aligned programs inclusive of digital pathways Data Sources: 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshots; 2018 June Instructional Report; 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (Online Edition) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3-8 will benefit from daily targeted small group instruction in core subjects; resulting in a 10% increase in students scoring a level 3 or 4 in Math as measured by the NYS exams. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).   Use data analysis protocol to gather, assess, and action plan using relevant data  Create leveled and targeted small groups aligned to specific skills and standards  Regularly assess curriculum maps to ensure target benchmarks are met  Utilize the observation feedback cycle to collaborate teachers with actionable next steps Instructional Cabinet, June 2018- September 2019 Administration  Analyze disaggregated data from previous year's state Teachers exams  Use data protocol to gather, assess, and action plan using relevant data  Engage in cycles of regular professional development, data inquiry and reflection with all pedagogical staff June 2018- September 2019  Build teacher capacity to plan for targeted data-driven Teachers small group instruction through meaningful cycles of inquiry  Create target groups of students for AIS (Academic Intervention Services) based on summative/formative assessment results  Expand AIS (Academic Intervention Services) program June 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Instructional Cabinet,  Vertical Planning Team,  Administration, NTN Math staff developers (Elementary and Middle)   Instructional Staff Instructional Cabinet  Administration  Vertical Planning Team  Paraprofessionals  Teachers  Instructional leaders  NTN staff developers (elementary and middle)  Bronx Field Support Team  Administration  FC Math Consultancy specialists School Data Corp  2018-19 SCEP-P 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will learn about our instructional focus through our Curriculum Night, Grade Newsletters and ongoing family workshops. This will help provide an overview of what is being taught in classrooms and supporting strategies that may be implemented at home. Our Parent Coordinator, PTA, and classroom teachers will be instrumental in maintaining communication. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budgetary allocations will support professional development through NTN Consultancy, FC Math Consultancy, and Data Wise Corporation. Monies will be allotted to purchase resources necessary to ensure access for all students. The work will be supported by teachers attending professional development outside of school as well as hosting in-school Staff Developers from NTN and FC Math Consultancy. We will utilize funds to support per session work for planning, facilitation of family workshops, and per diem to cover teachers to attend professional development. Common preparation periods embedded in the daily schedule will support teachers in working together to develop a deeper understanding of content knowledge and research-based pedagogical approaches. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, students in grades 3-8 will benefit from daily targeted small group instruction in mathematics; resulting in a 5% increase in students scoring a level 3 or 4 in Math as measured by the NY Ready CCLS simulation test. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. End of unit math assessments; NY Ready CCLS simulation test grades 3-8 (ELA and Math). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Context: A core belief at PS/MS 29 is the need to support the development of the whole child (Physical; academic and social emotional). We believe that in order for students to succeed they must feel safe and supported; permitting them to take positive academic and social risks. Strengths around this Element: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition) 89% of students feel safe in class; 86% of teachers say that adults at their school help students develop the skills they need to complete challenging coursework despite obstacles; 85% of teachers say that adults at their school tell their students they believe they can achieve high academic standards.  Two Deans, seven Social Workers, ACS Interns, and School Counselors who support students' academic and social-emotional well-being School wide behavioral expectations grounded in SHARE: Self-respect, Hard working, Advocacy, Resilience, Empathy respectively) Shared understanding of differentiated student learning and support   2018-19 SCEP-P 20   Consistent opportunities for collaborative/peer-partner work Needs around this Element: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition) 33% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school; 43% of students say that most students behave well even when the teacher isn't watching Single Shepherds will facilitate restorative circles to promote healthy peer:peer and peer:teacher relationships  Continue to employ a PBIS framework to support positive behaviors across all grades led of a teacher team   Additional counseling opportunities to support students' social-emotional well-being via ACS Interns  Continued professional development for teachers to provide teachers with strategies that help support students of varied social-emotional needs/levels Implement a dedicated Social Emotional Learning day through the Sandford Harmony Program  Data Sources: NYC 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition); school-wide anectdotal; OORS Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through the implementation of our Positive Behavior Intervention and Support (PBIS) based framework and student decision making driven by student government, there will be an increase of student ownership of learning as evidence by a 16% increase in positive response under the subgroup ‘classroom behavior’ in the School Quality Guide. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Analyze data from School Quality Guide under the student response in the subgroup "classroom environment" to identify areas to focus on Implement the Sanford Harmony SEL Program in alignment with PBIS SHARE values (Self-respect, Hard-work, Advocate, Resiliency, Empathy) Set attendance goals supported by action plan with special focus on chronically absent students    Monitor and analyze OORS data, noting special circumstances (e.g. gender, time of the day, etc.) with a focus on B21, A/B 24, and B36  Create sample survey questions aligned to the School Quality Guide aligned to the subgroup "classroom environment"  Use learning walks and weekly grade team and biweekly vertical planning team meetings to monitor the impact of student social/emotional well being Monthly Student Assemblies:  PBIS Celebrations  Academic celebrations  Attendance celebrations Progress monitoring of initiatives Student, teacher, family surveys   OORS data analysis  Vertical team meetings  Learning walks Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Fall 2018-June 2019 Administrative Team, Coaches, Deans, Teachers, Support Staff  Vertical Planning Team,  Administration  Teachers Fall 2018-June 2019 School-based Staff, Students, Families  PBIS Team  Administration  Teachers Fall 2018-June 2019 School-based Staff, Students, Families  Administrative Team  Teacher Teams  Vertical Planning Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  September through November, Families will learn about our SEL (Social Emotional Learning) and PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention System) through our Curriculum Night, Grade Newsletters and ongoing family workshops. What is shared with families will help provide an overview of what is being learned and what ios expected fo all 29 scholars. Our Parent Coordinator, PTA, PBIS Committee, and classroom teachers will be instrumental in this communication. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fiscally, the work will be equitably supported through funds allocated for resources to ensure all students have access to appropriate texts and materials aligned to the SEL mission. Additional monitoring of ORRS reports by the Administrative Team, Inquiry Team, and the Safety Committee will be supported with resources as needed. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there will be 8% increase in positive response in school created survey under the subgroup classroom behavior extracted from the School Quality Guide. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by data analysis in OORS and results of replicated School Quality Guide survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards N/A (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Context: PS/MS 29 strongly believes in the positive impact teacher teams have on supporting school-wide improvements. As such, dedicated periods of professional learning, inquiry, curriculum study, and instructional refinement are embedded in programming. Specifically, daily scheduling allows for the regular collaboration grade level teacher teams. Strengths around this Element: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition), 92% of teachers say that they talk with one another about instruction; 84% of teachers say that they design instructional programs (for example, lessons and units) together.  Established teacher teams and scheduled planning periods  Use of the Data Wise protocols and Meeting Wise Agendas to structure and maintain Collaborative Teacher Team meeting focus Needs around this Element: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition), 45% of teachers say that they had opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development; 67% of teachers say that their 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  professional development experiences this year have included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas.  Promote opportunities for intravisitations (district/city-wide)  Present differentiated professional learning opportunities series (think carefully about theory; apply best practices; evaluate impact/ refine) to allow for teacher choice and interest aligned to their instructional goals Data Sources: 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition), Feedback from instructional staff/coaches Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, teachers receiving targeted professional development will collaborate to create a total of 6 balanced literacy units; resulting in a 6% increase per grade (3-8) in students' overall constructed response score as measured by the NYS ELA test. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Present differentiated professional learning opportunities series (think carefully about theory; apply best practices; evaluate impact/ refine) to allow for teacher choice and interest aligned to their instructional goals  Collaborate with higher performing schools to schedule intervisitation opportunities with the purpose of observing research-based best practices Invite Bronx Borough Field Support specialists (SWD/ENL) to facilitate specialized professional development designed to elevate outcomes of targeted sub-groups   Ensure teacher access to reading/writing specialists with the purpose of enhancing their capacity to deliver standards-aligned specially designed instruction for all learners  Elevate teachers' capacity to support/challenge all learners  Create sustained professional development opportunities to strengthen teacher capacity to design purposeful standards-aligned balanced literacy units that support all learners  Develop a sustainable schedule that allows teachers, instructional coaches and administrators to analyze and refine lesson/unit plans Teaching staff, students September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Cabinet   Administrative team  Teachers/Educational Assistants  Teacher leaders   Students Instructional coaches Teaching staff, students September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Cabinet   Administrative team  Teachers/Educational Assistants  Teacher leaders   Students Instructional coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will receive newsletters to support families understanding of upcoming units of study; invitations to literacy celebrations; consistent feedback and actionable next steps to strengthen the school/home learning partnership; 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  periodic workshops to increase family awareness of common core learning standards as well as aligned strategies to support their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budgetary allocations will support the provision of coverage that will allow teachers to participate in intervisitation opportunities; per session will be paid to staff as needed to develop units of balanced literacy; instructional specialists will be contracted to support the growth of pedagogical practice and content knowledge. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, students in grades 3-8 will benefit from exposure to balanced literacy units; resulting in a 3% increase per grade (3-8) in students' overall constructed response score as measured by the NY Ready CCLS simulation test. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be monitored by collection and review of student data gleaned by the NY Ready CCLS simulation test; end of unit literacy assessments (writing-on demand/periodic running records). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. X X 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Context: PS/MS 29 maintains an emphasis on enriching the pedagogical practice of its teachers and does so through a thoughtful and thorough professional learning calendar organized and supported by school leadership for teachers. Strengths around this Element: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition), 83% of teachers say that the principal sets high standards for student learning; 83% of teachers say that it is clear how all of the programs offered are connected to their school's instructional vision.  Consistent and clear messaging from the administrative team, outlining high expectations for all learners  Purposeful programming to ensure alignment to instructional goals for students  Purposeful professional development to ensure alignment to instreuctional focus Needs around this Element: 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition), 43% of teachers say that they have influence over the selection of instructional materials used in classrooms; 55% of teachers say that they have influence over the development of instructional materials.  Promote opportunities for teaching staff to use supplemental instructional materials that are rigorous and standards aligned  Provide opportunities for teaching staff to collaboratively develop unit plans with the purpose of advancing student outcomes Data Sources: 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition), Feedback from teachers, ADVANCE ratings Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher's elevated understanding of effective assessment practices will allow them to create a purposeful assessment plan; resulting in a 10% increase in students scoring a level 3 or 4 in Math as measured by the NYS exams. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Administrators will attend labsite visits and planning Administrators June 2018-Administration sessions with TCRWP Staff Developers  Administrators will attend professional learning opportunities at TCRWP  Administrators will attend NYCDOE and District-led professional learning sessions  Administrators will attend professional learning opportunities facilitated by 29 staff  Outside professional learning opportunities to support instructional leadership will be scheduled with Literacy Support Systems, School Data Corp, and other consultants as appropriate.  Assess student portfolios via a student work protocol   Instructional Leads will engage in collaborative school walk through Foster collaboration between District 7 middle schools (PS/MS 29; MS/HS 223; PS/MS 5) to create common assessments for the purpose of analysing data and identifying district-wide trends and proposed refinement to instruction August 2019 Instructional Leads Administrative teams from identified middle schools September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Instructional Cabinet, Administrative Team Teachers, Instructional leads, Administrative teams from identified middle schools 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will learn about our school goals focus and through our Curriculum Night, Grade Newsletters and ongoing family workshops. What is shared with families will help provide an overview of what is being learned in the classroom as well as specifically, how their child is performing and what steps collaboratively between home and school to ensure their child meet grade level benchmarks. Our Parent Coordinator, PTA, and classroom teachers will 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  be instrumental in this communication. Administrators will partner with parents in ensuring learning is supported at home as well as at school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budgetary allocation will support administrative involvement in professional development and support from external assessment specialists. Coverage for absences to support collaboration between middle schools, additional vertical planning team articulation, and department meetings will be considered. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, teacher's elevated understanding of effective assessment practices will allow them to create a purposeful assessment plan; resulting in a 5% increase in students scoring a level 3 or 4 in Math as measured by the NY Ready CCLS Math simulation test. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE teacher ratings, Common end of unit math assessments developed by FC Consultancy, NY Ready CCLS, NY Ready CCLS Math simulation test Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed X N/A X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Context: PS/MS 29 is looking to expand the number of family workshops offered throughout the year and increase the attendance at reoccurring workshops to strengthen our larger school community. Strengths around this Element: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition), 90% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn; 98% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand.  Communication tools (phone blasts, newsletters, progress reports, conferences) translated in multiple languages  Purposeful Family engagement activities to communicate student progress and next steps for success 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Needs around this Element: According to the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition), 63% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school; 78% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child.  Provide opportunities for families to volunteer time to support classroom academic and social celebrations  Provide opportunities for families to visit their child's classroom to participate in team building and problem solving activities Data Sources: 2017-2018 School Quality Guide (online edition), feedback from parent surveys Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS/MS 29 will increase participation at grade level parent workshops designed to elevate family awareness of strategies to support enhanced reading skills; resulting in a 10% increase of K-2 students reading at end of year grade level benchmarks as measured by running records and a 10% increase in proficiency levels in grades 3-8 as measured by the NYS ELA test. 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Maintain updated website  Regularly update website with relevant information  Ensure website maintains integrity and high expectations Families June 2018-June 2019 of school community  Arrange quarterly unit of study scholar showcases  Collection of family emails for communication purposes   Regularly marketing on use of website Family workshops on website use Parent Coordinator, Administration, Teachers September 2018-June 2019  Regular monitoring of use of website via Google Families, Analytics Instructional communication with families   Curriculum Night  Monthly Family Newsletter   Family Workshops Student-Led Conferences Teachers Students, Families, Administration, Instructional Leads September 2018-June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Support staff - tech support, family worker  Administration  Teachers, Instructional Team, PC  Administration  Teachers  Parent Coordinator Support Staff   Administration  Teachers Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Morris Heights Health Center, Resources for Families, IncludeNYC, Hands in 4 Youth, Urban Dove Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Budgetary allocations will support grade level parent workshops designed to elevate family awareness of strategies to support enhanced reading skills. Per session will be paid to staff as needed to plan and execute workshops. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, resulting in a 5% increase of K-2 students reading at mid-year grade level benchmarks as measured by running records and a 5% increase in proficiency levels in grades 3-8 as measured by the NY Ready CCLS ELA simulation test. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers College running records, NY Ready CCLS ELA simulation test, Parent participation surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students in grades 3-8 participating in expandED day learning opportunities (academic, physical and social-emotional) will see a 10% increase in overall ELA and Math performance as measured by a comparative analysis (November base-line/ May parallel exam)of Iready standards-aligned test simulations. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Students and their families will be presented with the full range of activities offered through after school providers both CBO and school-based options. Student participation will be based on need as well as parental request. Student attendance will be rewarded and progress reports based on activities will be sent home to keep parents updated on their child's progress. Parent outreach will also occur for students dropping by 85% attendance. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. The ELT programs during the 2018-2019 school year will integrate ELA and Math expandED day learning opportunities (academic, physical and social-emotional). Students will be surveyed to assess their interest and programs will be created to meet the assessed needs. We will use social media, Twitter and Instagram, our school website 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  (www.PSMS29.org), robocalls, newsletters and mass emails as means of outreach to alert our families to learning opportunities available for students. Instruction for ELT programs will combine PS/MS 29 staff as well as outside hires made by the community partners. Each ELT program will have an Academic Adviser on instructional content to ensure students are given practice and support in the areas they need improvement within and lessons from NYS certified teachers are CCLS-aligned and present rigorous and dynamic instruction. To encourage as many students to participate in afterschool activities outreach begins before the start of school by CBO Hands in 4 Youth. In September, regular outreach is conducted through fliers, phone calls, as well as at school drop-off and dismissal. Families will be contacted when students attendance falls below set threshold for successful participation. A wait list will be maintained. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The Administrative Team along with the Instructional Cabinet will support and supervise ELT programs. The school-based members will work in conjunction with the community partners to ensure a beneficial experience for students. Program evaluation will be based on summative assessment and project-based learning examples for each respective activity. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Spring & Summer 2018- Planning for ELT August 2018-September 2019- Staffing ELT programs October-November 2019- Launch of ELT after school & Saturday Academy May 2019- Conclusion of Saturday Academy June 2019- Conclusion of After school Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Human Resources : School staff, community based partner' staff Instructional Resources: Support materials for academic intensives and other activities 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Adjustments : Planning and professional learning time for all instructors around supporting student learning Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside X SIG Grant School X Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-point benchmark for school progress towards meeting the goal of increased student participation will be in February 2019 with additional checks to ensure sustained attendance occurring each month. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use data from OORS, academic assessments such as, but not limited to, reading levels, as well as attendance data. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) One-on-one; small groups When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day One-on-one; small groups During the school day One-on-one; small groups During the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Grades 1-2: Reading Recovery, offered by paraprofessionals, designed to provide short-term intensive interventions to struggling readers. Grades 3-8: AIS ELA and Math. Intensive RtI4-6 weeks cycles designed to provide targeted instructions to students who are performing far below grade level. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Our school offers two kinds of intervention - academic and non- academic.Students are assigned to receive either intervention early in the school year.Students may also be recommended to receive either or both types of intervention as the school year progresses. We also look for students who are operating well below grade-level and making little or no measurable progress. Non- academic interventionrefers toeverything outside the academic scope, includingspeech and language needs. The "Intervention" page of the school website is used to make referrals.Any staff member can complete a recommendation for intervention . Once an academic intervention recommendation has been submitted, it will be reviewed for inclusion in the next cycle.Non-academic interventionrecommendations are handled differently.Once received, the recommendation will next be reviewed by the Intervention Team.This team includes the Administrative Team and the Special Education Coordinator along with the Deans, School Psychologist, Social Worker, 2018-19 SCEP-P 39 One-on-one; small groups During the school day One-on-one; small groups During the school day Grades 3-8: AIS ELA and Math. Intensive RtI4-6 weeks cycles designed to provide targeted instructions to students who are performing far below grade level. Mathematics and Guidance Counselor.A decision will then be made as to how to proceed and the staff member who completed the recommendation will be informed of next steps. Our school offers two kinds of intervention - academic and non- academic.Students are assigned to receive either intervention early in the school year.Students may also be recommended to receive either or both types of intervention as the school year progresses. We also look for students who are operating well below grade-level and making little or no measurable progress. Non- academic interventionrefers toeverything outside the academic scope, includingspeech and language needs. The " Intervention " page of the school website is used to make referrals.Any staff member can complete a recommendation for intervention . Once an academic intervention recommendation has been submitted, it will be reviewed by the RTI Coordinator for inclusion in the next cycle.Non- academic intervention recommendations are handled differently.Once received, the recommendation will next be reviewed by the Intervention Team.This team includes the Administrative Team and the Special Education Coordinator along with the Deans, School Psychologist, Social Worker, and Guidance Counselor.A decision will then be made as to how to proceed and the 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Science Social Studies staff member who completed the recommendation will be informed of next steps. Our school offers two kinds of intervention - academic and non- academic.Students are assigned to receive either intervention early in the school year.Students may also be recommended to receive either or both types of intervention as the school year progresses. We also look for students who are operating well below grade-level and making little or no measurable progress. Non- academic interventionrefers toeverything outside the academic scope, includingspeech and language needs. The "Intervention" page of the school website is used to make referrals.Any staff member can complete a recommendation for intervention . Once an academic intervention recommendation has been submitted, it will be reviewed for inclusion in the next cycle.Non-academic interventionrecommendations are handled differently.Once received, the recommendation will next be reviewed by the Intervention Team.This team includes the Administrative Team and the Special Education Coordinator along with the Deans, School Psychologist, Social Worker, and Guidance Counselor.A decision will then be made as to how to proceed and the staff member who completed the recommendation will be informed of next steps. Our school offers two kinds of intervention - academic and non- academic.Students are One-on-one; small groups During the school day One-on-one; small groups During the school day One-on-one; small groups During the school day Grades 1-2: Reading Recovery, offered by paraprofessionals, designed to provide short-term intensive interventions to struggling readers. Grades 3-8: AIS ELA and Math. Intensive RtI4-6 weeks cycles designed to provide targeted instructions to students who are performing far below grade level. Grades 1-2: Reading Recovery, offered by paraprofessionals, One-on-one; small groups During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-P 41 designed to provide short-term intensive interventions to struggling readers. One-on-one; small groups During the school day One-on-one; small groups During the school day Grades 3-8: AIS ELA and Math. Intensive RtI4-6 weeks cycles designed to provide targeted instructions to students who are performing far below grade level. assigned to receive either intervention early in the school year.Students may also be recommended to receive either or both types of intervention as the school year progresses. We also look for students who are operating well below grade-level and making little or no measurable progress. Non- academic interventionrefers toeverything outside the academic scope, includingspeech and language needs. The "Intervention" page of the school website is used to make referrals.Any staff member can complete a recommendation for intervention . Once an academic intervention recommendation has been submitted, it will be reviewed for inclusion in the next cycle.Non-academic interventionrecommendations are handled differently.Once received, the recommendation will next be reviewed by the Intervention Team.This team includes the Administrative Team and the Special Education Coordinator along with the Deans, School Psychologist, Social Worker, and Guidance Counselor.A decision will then be made as to how to proceed and the staff member who completed the recommendation will be informed of next steps.therapy, and mental health/personal issues possibly requiring counseling of some kind. TheIntervention page of the school's internal website is used to make referrals.Any staff member can complete a recommendation for intervention . Once an academic intervention 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) recommendation has been submitted, it will be reviewed by the RtI Coordinator for inclusion in the next cycle.Non- academic intervention recommendations are handled differently.Once received, the recommendation will next be reviewed by the Intervention Team.This team includes the Administrative Team and the Special Education Coordinator along with the Deans, School Psychologist, Social Worker, and Guidance Counselor.A decision will then be made as to how to proceed and the staff member who completed the recommendation will be informed of next steps. Our school offers two kinds of intervention - academic and non- academic.Students are assigned to receive either intervention early in the school year.Students may also be recommended to receive either or both types of intervention as the school year progresses. We also look for students who are operating well below grade-level and making little or no measurable progress. Non- academic interventionrefers toeverything outside the academic scope, includingspeech and language needs. The "Intervention" page of the school website is used to make referrals.Any staff member can complete a recommendation for intervention . Once an academic intervention recommendation has been submitted, it will be reviewed for inclusion in the next cycle.Non-academic interventionrecommendations At-Risk interventions provided by service providers for students identified by the school's PPT One-on-one by a member of Crisis Team One-on-one by a member of the on-school-site Morris Heights Health Clinic During the school day During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  are handled differently.Once received, the recommendation will next be reviewed by the Intervention Team.This team includes the Administrative Team and the Special Education Coordinator along with the Deans, School Psychologist, Social Worker, and Guidance Counselor.A decision will then be made as to how to proceed and the staff member who completed the recommendation will be informed of next steps. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 30 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services for our STH population include parent outreach and support and for students. Support for students entails: counseling services, emergency supplies, school supplies, uniforms, glasses, and intervention programs so that these students have opportunities to progress academically and feel socially and emotionally supported in school. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional development is at the center of our school improvement plan. We create a comprehensive plan for all staff constituents prior to the start of the school year and alter as needed based on data collected. Staff is encouraged to seek outside opportunities for professional development as well as to turnkey that information to colleagues. We have differentiated professional book clubs, weekly focused meetings, annual, monthly, and weekly goals and meetings to alter our dynamic professional development plan as needed. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). We host visits from our own pre-kindergarten students in our kindergarten classrooms as well as from other community-based programs. Pre-kindergarten teachers are part of our Lead Teacher cohort and they participate in conversations and professional development around curriculum and assessment regularly. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. School-wide assessment decision are a collaborative practice involving the MOSL Team, Coaches, and our Instructional Cabinet. We study assessment as a genre and will continue to do so during the upcoming school year. Teachers will provide input in weekly grade or subject meeting to ensure the assessments given are reflective of the curriculum covered. Thus, data coming from these assessments is a true reflection of what was taught. If misalignment occurs, changes to pacing or assessments given to students will occur. Multiple professional learning opportunities for teachers this year will focus on data. In particular, our professional learning communities will use various protocols on Mondays to review assessment data and plan for next instructional steps. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Federal Federal Federal 710,105 NA 137,835 149,742.00 X NA X NA Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, Section 5B, Section 5C, Section 5D, Section 5E NA Section 5A, Section 5C, Section 5D NA 2018-19 SCEP-P 48 Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 13,006 NA 4,339,644 X NA X Section 5D, Section E NA Section 5A, Section 5B, Section 5C 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy PS/MS 29, The Melrose School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the link between the school and the community. School 29’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on School Leadership Teams, Parent Associations, and Title I Parent Advisory Councils, as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school’s community. Educational research shows a positive correlation between parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of the policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will:  build a home-school partnership that assists parents in acquiring effective parenting skills;  provide parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making; increase their understanding of their right to support their child’s education by being involved in the educational process; increase the role of the home in enriching education and improving student achievement; and   develop positive attitudes toward the entire school community. In developing the School 29 Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students School 29’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English language learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and if necessary, to revise the Title I Parent Involvement Program and this policy. To increase parent involvement, School 29 will: Parental Involvement and School Quality  Actively involve and engage parents in planning, reviewing and improving the Title I program, including the Parent Involvement Policy of the school;  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I funds that local education agencies  (LEAs) must set-aside and distribute directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Advisory Council. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  Maintain Parent Coordinators to serve as liaisons between the school and communities. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with FACE;  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, grade-level curriculum expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home.  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system (e.g., ESSA/State accountability status, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;)  Host the required Annual Meeting to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Section 1118 of Title I, School 29 will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Holding parent curriculum classes;  Hosting events/activities during Open School Week;  Encouraging meaningful parent participation in the School Leadership Teams and the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association); Supporting or hosting FACE Family Day events; Starting school clubs for parents and students (e.g., book clubs, chess clubs, etc.);   Establishing a Parent Resource Center or lending library;   Hosting events for male parents/guardians and grandparents;  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers through Learning Leaders;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  Developing and distributing a school newsletter; and 2018-19 SCEP-P 52   Providing school planners for daily written communication between school/teacher and the home. SCHOOL - PARENT COMPACT for School 29 School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/MS 29 staff and the parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share the responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school/parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State standards. SCHOOL RESPONSIBILITIES PS/MS 29 staff will: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s standards by: o using academic learning time efficiently; o providing a safe, supportive and effective learning environment for students and a welcoming environment for parents/guardians; respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to State standards; o o o offering high quality instruction in all content areas; and o providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). address communication issues between teachers and parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related;  Convening an annual meeting (early in the school year) for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the Title I program and their right to be involved;  Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, i.e., morning and evening; and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation, child care or home visits for those parents who cannot attend a regular school meeting;  Ensuring that information related to school and parent programs, meetings, and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Involving parents in planning, reviewing, evaluating and improving the Title I programs and the parental involvement policy;   Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual and school information; and ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents.  Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; and  Conduct parent workshops where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that  address their parenting and educational needs. Schedule additional parent meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher; arranging opportunities for parents to volunteer in the school or at home; and  Providing for Open School activities that include observations of classroom activities.  Provide support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents o Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities. Times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend; o Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; and o Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents. PARENT/GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITIES The Parent/Guardian will: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure my child arrives to school on time. When my child is absent, I will follow the procedures to inform the school;  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule of for bedtime based on the needs of my child and their age;  Make sure that homework is completed and assist my child if necessary;  Read to my child or discuss what my child is reading each day (minimum 15 minutes);   Promote positive use of my child’s extracurricular time such as, afterschool extra learning opportunities, Set limits to the amount of time and what my child watches on television or plays video games; clubs, team sports and/or quality family time;  Encourage my child to follow the school’s rules and regulations and  Discuss this Compact with my child;  Volunteer in my child’s school either at the school or assisting from my home in some way if time or schedule permits;  Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education. I will;  Communicate with my child’s teacher about their educational needs and stay informed about their education by promptly reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  Respond to surveys and notices when requested;  Become involved in developing, implementing, evaluating, and revising the school-parent involvement policy;  Participate in or request training that the school offers on teaching and learning strategies whenever possible;  Take part in the PA or serve to the extent possible on policy advisory groups, e.g., school or district Title I Parent Advisory Councils, School or District Leadership Teams; and Share the responsibility for the improved student achievement of my child.  STUDENT’S RESPONSIBILITIES I will: III. Student Responsibilities  Attend school regularly and be on time for school;  Complete my homework and turn in all assignments on time;   Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; Show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-P 54   Try to solve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; and  Always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: PS/MS 29 is a 3K through eighth grade school in the South Bronx. The total population of students is 804. According to recent ELL information in the AMAO report, 116 pupils, are classified as English Language Learners. According to the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL information, students are on a variety of levels, with 19 entering, 3 emerging, 46 expanding, 27 transitioning, and 9 commanding. Upon examination of our NYSESLAT and AMAO data, our targeted subgroup to be served through this supplemental program are our entering, emerging and transitioning ELL students. These students are ELLs who scored below proficient on the reading component of the NYSESLAT exam. Therefore, the program will focus on literacy, specifically reading comprehension as well as foundational literacy skills for students in grades K-2. Our students in the lower grades need to master these skills in order to become more proficient readers. We will utilize Readers Theatre to focus on small group instruction to target growth in ELA performance. The program will begin in November 17, 2018 and be held after school on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:45-4:15 pm and on Saturdays from . The program will run through May and end on the first Thursday of the month, May 2, 2019 and instruction will be conducted in English. There will be two certified ENL teachers and two common branch teachers participating in the program. The teachers will use the intervention materials from the school's literacy curriculum, TCRWP as well as Lively Letters, I-Ready, and Finish Line New York Ells workbooks. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We will provide professional development to support all staff who teach ELL students. These sessions will occur during Monday professional learning time, 2:40 to 4 PM. They will focus on incorporating instructional techniques to support newcomers and SIFE ELLs. We will utilize Bronx Field Support to lead our professional learning sessions. Teachers will discuss and practice strategies such as using visuals, scaffolding information, using graphic organizers, and 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Part C: Professional Development goal setting to support their ELL students in the heterogeneously grouped classroom. The planned days for professional development are November 26, 2018 and March 11, 2019. Our Professional Development sessions are intended for all teachers and service providers on staff. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of our English Language Learners will be invited to attend two one-hour parent workshops, held in the morning and after school. Those workshops will be presented by Emeline Velten, our ENL Coordinator. Workshop #1(Date TBD from 2:45 to 3:45 PM): Orientation session regarding the goals and expectations of the Title III Immigration program. Workshop#2(Date TBD from 2:45 to 3:45 PM): Strategies to be used at home to support children's academic progress. These strategies may include reading aloud in native language and English, creating and playing educational games (letter/word/number bingo; memory/concentration games for spelling, for memorizing multiplication tables, learning of meaning and definition; using Internet and neighborhood library to do a research; use of bilingual dictionaries. Parents will receive letters notifying of these activities. Letters and flyers will be translated into parents' native language. Additional phone calls will be made. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 7 School Name The Melrose School Borough Bronx School Number 029 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Meredith Gotlin Coach Kelly Neault ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Danielle Ippolito Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Hanson/Special Educati Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Elisa Alvarez Assistant Principal Natalie Morman Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent type here Parent Coordinator Monse Santana Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Guerrero Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 3 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 794 Total number of ELLs 120 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.11% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1990? K 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 0 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At Ps/MS 20, we use Teacher's college Reading and Writing Project (TCRWP) running records, assessment tool to measure the literacy skills of our ELLs. We also identify ELL students' proficiency level, based on their most recent NYSESLAT scores in conjuction with information gathered using the EDAT report. This data provides us with an understanding of each child's performance level, fluency, decoding, and comprehesion skills. The reading levels and NYSESLAT data analysis enables us to develop a coherent instructional plan and strengthen programs to benefit the learning of our ELLs. Our instructional plan includes small group work, scaffolding, partnering of ELLs and modified materials. These plans are developed based on insight gleaned from data analysis. Phonics assessments are done using the Fundations program where concepts of prints and letter/sound knowledge are assessed. Assessments in math are done using the GoMath curriculum where item anaylsis is done to determine the language as well as mathematical gaps. Classrooms are using I-ready in both ELA and Math which allows for 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  students to be assessed and then progress through lessons targeted on their needs. Data is collected and input on a central location in Dropbox. The data is then looked at by the teacher, the grade team, the service providers, and the AIS team to determine what supports are needed in which areas. Targeted instruction and small groups are created within the classroom to ensure that students are mastering the skills they are struggling with. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Data is collected by both classroom and ENL teachers . Grade team meetings are held weekly where teams meet to discuss, analyze, and plan next steps using the data gleaned during these meetings. ENL team meetings are also held weekly where the team meets to specifically discuss the language acquisition progress made, or not made by the ELLs. ENL providers meet with teachers to discuss work samples and trends noticed. Bilingual classroom teachers take part in their corresponding grade team meetings where they analyze the work of their students, but can also share their knowledge with their teams. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our program for ELLs based on data analysis revealed in the AMAO tool. Our AMAO tool revealed that the majority of our ELLs reach proficiency levels as they move to higher grades. The EDAT report was studied, analyzed, and decisions were made by the ENL department on different foci for the year based upon information found in the report. Assessments in ELA are done on a as need basis, but are done quarterly to determine what levels students are performing on. Assessments such as running records, concepts of print, letter/sound knowledge, as well as GoMath/CMP3 assessments are done after each unit taught. Information from these assessments, as well as the HLA are looked at and changes are made to instruction/grouping as needed. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? At PS/MS 29, data is updated and shared via Dropbox. This data is used during grade team meetings, as well as analyzed during instructional cabinet meetings in order to make decisions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school identifies ELLs that performed at level 1 in Math and or ELA, as well as by looking at the information on Dropbox provided by classroom teachers and iReady. In addition to mandated ENL services, these students also receive supports through the Response to Intervention framework. Students receive Tier 1 intervention within the classroom by their classroom teacher. Students are identified during classwide assessments, as well as during observations made by the teacher. Interventions such as creating small groups based on skills needed are created and monitored for 6 weeks. Our AIS cycles run for 30 days, and a referral form is on our school website. Teachers who identify students who are at risk, fill out the form, and then tier 2 intervention is done with this student outside of the classroom. AIS providers see students 5 days a week, and after that cycle, meet to discuss the progress, or lack of progress with those students. From here, a determination is made whether the student continues into cycle 3, or is cycled out with specific plans for what the teacher should continue to do. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across performance levels reveal that we have 37 students at the entering level, 11 emerging, 32 transitioning, and 40 expanding students. This data is based on their NYSESLAT scores from 2016-2017 school year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Grade team meetings, and data review time is spent using the EDAT report with the ENL teachers to determine next steps, and to plan accordingly for the population we are currently serving. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our freestanding ENL program will provide instruction in English with home language support, emphasizing English language acquistion. As per CR Part 154, we will offer two types of ENL services: stand-alone and integrated. The purpose of stand-alone ENL is to develop English language skills so that students can succeed in core content courses. The goal of integrated ENL is to build English language skills through content area instruction. Our students will be grouped hetereogenously and or homogenously, based on need, in order to deliver the required services. ENL instruction is delivered by certified ENL instructors. Standalone programs are delivered using a pull out method where ENL providers work with students in order to continue to build their skills based on data collected. These small groups are targeted and focus on building language using speaking, listening, reading, and writing. These stand alone groups provide students their mandated ENL minutes, while the integrated program focuses on building the necessary skills and scaffolds within the classroom. By the ENL provider pushing in to the classroom, the students are given the scaffolds needed in order to access the grade level curriculum. Students work in groups both heterogeneously and homogeneously based on level dependent on the objective of the lesson. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our TBE program is designed so that students develop conceptual skills in their home language as they learn English. Our classes are bridged (1/2 and 3/4) based on school need. There is a range of proficiency levels in our bilingual classrooms. Our bilingual classes are taught by certified bilingual teachers. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per CR Part 154, our school ensures that the mandated instructional minutes are delivered for each program. For our ENL program, our entering, emerging, and transitioning ELLs received integrated ENL in ELA. Our expanding and commanding students also receive integrated ENL, but depending on the needs of the students, these children may receive integrated ENL in ELA or another content area. In our TBE program, the home language usage decreases over time as students develop English language skills. For example, at the entering level, students receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English. Our transitioning students, on the other hand, receive 50% of instruction in their home language and 50% in English. HLA is delivered in the bilingual classes as an ENL teacher, as well as the bilingual teacher teaches this block. During integrated ENL time, the class is co-taught, or the ENL provider pulls small groups of students based on need in order to build on the needs of the students. ENL minutes are scheduled, and then providers ensure to keep conference notes and data on their students to ensure that while the students are receiving their minutes, the program is continuiing to develop their skills. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our ENL and bilingual programs, the teachers provide a variety of strategies to ensure content is comprehensible in English and the New York State Learning Standards are met. With guidance and support from instructors including scaffolds and small group instruction provided, students will be given the necessary tools in order to work towards the NYS Learning Standards. The certified ENL teachers are given pacing calendars and curriculum maps by the classroom teachers to plan their instruction and include content information and vocabulary that the ELLs will need in their classroom. ENL teachers use visuals, manipulatives, and videos to customize the display of information that has already been taught in their classroom or will be taught in their classroom. In our ENL and bilingual classes, picture Dictionaries, Picture word walls, and technology are used to 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  clarify vocabulary, and prompts and sentence starters help clarify syntax and structure. Our ENL and bilingual teachers activate prior knowledge by using concept maps and charts they have created together while discussing students’ experiences. The program used for ELA across the school is Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project. This content is delivered in English to students, however depending on their proficiency level, the content is also delivered in Spanish during small groups. The math curriculum in grades K-5 is GoMath, and in the middle school, the curriuculum is CMP3. Teachers create groups based on grade level and proficiency level in order to differentiate the language needed. Students in the bilingual class are taught HLA in both Science and Social Studies. A teacher pushes into the classroom in order to teach these classes. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our Spanish speaking ELLs in bilingual classes are given running records and Benchmark Assessments adapted for Spanish to measure their progress in their home language. Students in our ENL program are evaluated based on oral assessments and or a retelling of texts in their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. Our instructional plan for SIFEs is geared towards students' individual needs. Some students come to our school without literacy skills or knowledge of the Latin Alphabet. For example, our Arabic students use "Handwriting Without Tears" by Jan Olsen to develop a new habit of writing in English. ENL teachers inform classroom teachers about SIFE students' academic levels and share specific strategies that may be used with SIFE students. Specific differentiation for our SIFE students includes small group instruction, visuals, and hands on activities. B. Newcomers receive ENL services based on their proficiency level. Beginner newcomers receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction every week. Within the 360 minutes, newcomers receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. ENL teachers work collaboratively with classroom teachers on accessing appropriate materials and or modifying lessons to support instruction in the classroom. C. Developing ELLs receive specific supports to enhance their learning. Our intermediate developing ELLs will receive 180 minutes of weekly services. 90 minutes of services will be conducted in the integrated ENL model while the other 90 minutes will be standalone or integrated ENL. D. Long term ELLs receive continued support. Instruction is differentiated to ensure students continue to gain knowledge of the English language. E. Former ELLs, up to two years after exiting ELL status, are still given supports. For at least two years following the school year in which a student exited from ELL status, former ELLs will receive at least one half of one unit of study of ENL and will continue to be eligible for certain specified testing accomodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies used to make content accessible and enrich language development for ELL-SWDs include: multi-level group work, TPR techniques, hands on activities, integration of visual supports and graphic organizers. Visuals aids and charts with pictures associated with the words or ideas are created and displayed in classrooms to assist ELL-SWDs with learning. Grade level materials are provided to students based on the current grade that they are in. Scaffolds and foundational skills are built into the curriculum in order to ensure that those skills are taught and addressed. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ENL teachers co-plan with classroom teachers and are familiar with the units of study that students are expected to complete their grade. ENL teachers engage in curriculum planning based on the learning needs and abilities of ELL-SWDs they support. When they deliver integrated ENL services, the ENL teacher co-teaches with the classroom teacher in order to support ELL students who are learning alongside their general education peers. Students are flexibly scheduled in order to 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  ensure that they have access and are integrated with the general education peers. IEP goals are worked on in conjunction with both the service providers and the classroom teacher. These goals are progress monitored in order to make sure that students are making progress and their needs are being met. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Response to Intervention (RTI) is used to identify ELLs at risk for poor learning outcomes, monitor student progress, provide evidence-based interventions and adjust the intensity and nature of those interventions depending on a student’s responsiveness, and or identify students with disabilities. Targeted interventions for advanced ELLs include the ENL teacher helping to support the content areas of ELA, Math, Social Studies, and or Science. Depending on the needs of the child, the ENL teacher works closely with the classroom teachers to co-plan and connect the work in the freestanding ENL program to the child's classroom. Targeted interventions for math include one on one support during math instruction periods, focusing on word problems and modeling examples of the process. The ENL teacher supports the Entering and Emerging ELLs by utilizing ENL strategies through small group instruction in the stand alone model. This helps ELLs in reaching the Common Core Learning Standards for ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science. The advanced group has more independent time to practice the skills and strategies taught both in their classrooms and in their ENL classes. The flow between the two classroom environments helps the students to make the connection from the highly scaffolded ENL environment back to the larger class environment. Integrated language and content instruction provides opportunities for beginner ELLs to acquire a new language through the study of the academic disciplines such as Math, Science, History, and Language Arts. Afterschool programs are offered for all grades within the school, with a targeted after school focused on Literacy development for students in grades K-8. This program will use small group instruction to target foundational skills, as well as vocabulary development to increase the literacy content knowledge and accessibility of the students. The sub-groups targeted are students in all levels in order to continue to develop their growth. The target language intervention is done in is English. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are not adding any new programs for the upcoming school year. However, we are revising our scheduling to ensure services for our ELLs students are met, according to the new CR Part 154 requirements. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any programs/services for ELLs at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are able to participate in all school activities. They are invited to participate in all our programs. In addition, we offer an after school supplemental literacy program to for our ELL students. Our after school program is offered to children who scored below proficient on the reading component of the NYSESLAT exam. During the school day, students spend non academic time with other students in the school. After school for ELLs is going to begin Nov 1 and run until May. After school will focus on building knowledge in literacy, and foundational skills necessary to continue to make progress in English proficiency. Saturday academy will run for 20 sessions where students will take part in ELA and Math content, as well as a sports program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use a variety of instructional materials, including technology, to support and enrich the learning of our ELL students. In ELA, our students participate in the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project curriculum, as well as participate in guided reading and books clubs based on their reading levels. For math, the curriculum is GoMath and students are able to work on skill building, as well as solving complex words problems. Our ENL and bilingual teachers use SmartBoards, document cameras, projectors, dvds, as well as online websites geared specifically towards ELL students. Our ENL and bilingual teachers also use iPads, laptops, and computers to incorporate technology into their lessons. Foundational skills and phonics are 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  addressed using both Fundations and Words Their Way. In order to improve comprehension as well as fluency, The Leveled Literacy Intervention program is used that has targeted books and lessons geared to building specific skills. ENL teachers work with the grade level team in order to plan appropriate scaffolds to support students with grade level content. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language is used to support English language acquisition. In our TBE program, as ELLs develop English language skills, instructional time in the home language decreases. In accordance with CR Part 154, our Entering ELLs receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English. At the transitioning level, this ratio shifts and students receive 50% of instruction in their home language and 50% in English. At the Expanding level, 75% of instruction is in English and the remaining 25% is in the home language. In the bilingual class, the HLA assessment is given in the fall and the spring in order to assess the literacy development of students. Running records are given in both English and Spanish in order to ensure that teachers can provide supports to students as needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our school ensures all required services/resource supports correspond to the ELLs' ages and grade levels. All materials and resources are placed in classrooms based on the results of assessment analysis and materials are tailored to meet their needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use a variety of instructional materials, including technology, to support and enrich the learning of our ELL students. Our bilingual teachers meet with their grade teams where they are able to co-plan, and our ENL providers meet together, as well as with grade teams to ensure that the needs of all of our students are met. Our ENL and bilingual teachers use SmartBoards, document cameras, projectors, dvds, as well as online websites geared specifically towards ELL students. Our ENL and bilingual teachers also use iPads, laptops, and computers to incorporate technology into their lessons. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To offer assistance to our newly enrolled ELL students, we provide orientation during the summer. Our bilingual parent coordinator and ENL teacher is involved in our summer orientation. We also distribute literature and brochures to inform our newly enrolled ELL students and their families of the support we provide. For all other students, we offer orientation on an going basis throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We will provide our staff with professional development to support the needs of ELLs throughout our school. All staff including administrators, bilingual and ENL teachers, common branch teachers, content area teachers, paraprofessionals and support staff will receive professional development on the first day of the new school year. The focus will be meeting the needs of the ELL students in our classrooms. In addition to our September PD, ELL professional development will be integrated into our year long PD plan. All school staff will receive on-going ELL PD throughout the 2017-18 school year such as creating scaffolds for ELLs, and engaging parents in ways to work with their children at home. A variety of professional development is offered to our teachers our ELLs. Multiple workshops and seminars for teachers of ELLs are offered by the DOE throughout the year. Our ENL, bilingual and classroom teachers will attend these workshops in order to improve their teaching skills, get new ideas and engage in the New York State Learning Standards. Our school will collaborate with our Borough Field Support Center to receive PD offered through their offices. Non pedagogical staff will also participate in the PD's offered at the school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Since we are a pre-k through grade 8 school, many of our students remain in our building for elementary and middle school. Our ENL staff frequently visit our middle school classrooms to understand the expectations of middle school. In this way, our ENL teachers are able to support students through the transition. In addition, at the end of the middle school experience, our ENL teachers work with students to select appropriate high schools and discuss the demands of high school. Agendas and attendance are kept on file and maintained in the main office to ensure our school meets the professional development requirements for all teacher and for bilingual/ENL teachers, as per CR Part 154. By year's end, 15% of the total PD hours for our staff and 50% of total PD hours for bilingual/ENL teachers will have focused on ELL-specific professional development such as building scaffolds within the classroom to support content knowledge access. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? As per CR Part 154, our school will provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency results and language development needs in all content areas. The meeting will be conducted with a qualified interpreter in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. The annual meetings will be scheduled during our school's weekly Family Engagement time, before school and or after school. 2. Records are maintained to ensure annual individual meetings with ELL parents are held. In order to accommodate parent schedules, phone calls, letters and in person meetings are offered as ways to communicate. Our ENL teachers will maintain records of annual individual meetings with parents. This documentation will be maintained in a shared binder in our main office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. PS MS 29 offers a variety of workshops and courses to assist parents in working with their children. At the beginning of the school year, we offer a parent orientation that provides information on how parents can work with their students and how the school will support their children. In addition, workshops will be designed based on the needs and feedback from the 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  parents. Workshops may include community safety issues, activities for children during non-school hours and or accessing health services. Workshops are offered in both Spanish and English. For all parental involvement activities, we will utilize the DOE's Translation and Interpration Unit to translate pertinent documents and or provide over-the-phone interpretation services. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our teachers work collaboratively with one another to ensure that all students needs are met. 2018-19 SCEP-P 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Meredith Gotlin, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Melrose School School DBN: 07X029 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Meredith Gotlin Title Principal Natalie Morman Assistant Principal Monse Santana Parent Coordinator Danielle Ippolito ENL/Bilingual Teacher ------------------ Parent Jessica Hanson Teacher/Subject Area -------------------- Teacher/Subject Area Kelly Neault ---------------------- Coach Coach -------------------- School Counselor ------------------------ Maria Guerreo Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ----------------------- ------------------------------ Other -------------------------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------ Other ------------------------------ Other ----------------------------- Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 ------------- 6/29/17 ---------------- 6/29/17 ----------------- ------------------ -------------------- 6/29/17 ------------------------ ---------------------------- ----------------------------- 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X029 School Name: The Melrose School Superintendent: Elisa Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) -------------- ----------------- ----------------------- ------------------------ Monse Santana Parent Coordinator Yes Yes ------------------- --------------- --------------- ----------------- ------------------- ---------------------- ------------------ ------------------ ------------------------ ------------------- * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school uses multiple data points to assess language preferences of our parent community for both written and oral communication. Extensive analysis of the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS reports and student emergency contact cards provide us with insight into our parents' preferred language of communication. Furthermore, teachers survey their class at the beginning of the year to determine parents' preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Afrikaans, Arabric, Bengali, French, Fulani, Mandinka, Marathi, English, Spanish, Soninke Below is a list of our parents' preferred languages for oral communication: Afrikaans, Arabric, Bengali, French, Fulani, Mandinka, Marathi, English, Slovak, Spanish, Soninke Below is a list of our parents preferred languages for written communication: Spanish and English ---------------------- --------------- Afrikaans .1% Arabic 2.26, Bengali .1, French .29, Fulani .1, Mandinka .29, Marathi .1, English 68.79, Spanish 27.38, Soninke .59 --------------- Afrikaans: 1 Arabric: 19 Bengali: 2 French: 3 Fulani: 0% Mandinka: 3 Marathi: 1 English: 699 Slovak: 1 Spanish: 282 Soninke: 8 Afrikaans: .1% Arabric: 1.86% Bengali: .2% French: .29% Fulani: 0% Mandinka: .29% Marathi: .1% English: 68.6% Slovak: .1% Spanish: 27.6% Soninke: .79% ------------ ------------------ --------------------- -------------------- -------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ -------------------- -------------------- --------------------- ------------------- ------------------- 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The following documents are disseminated throughout the school year: annual handbooks, student planner/handbook, monthly newsletters, monthly calendars, parent teacher conference announcements, This information is provided either monthly, or as needed basis depending on the document. Monthly newsletters go home, and parent teacher conference dates and shared quarterly. We use DOE Intranet templates for covered languages, as well as school personnel, as well as the interpretation services available via over the phone translation. 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  open school night, after school program information, NYS testing dates, overview of school curriculum, and letters from the school leadership team. Our calendars and important dates are distributed monthly, and as needed. --------------- ------------------- ------------------- -------------------- ------------------- -------------------- ------------------- --------------------- ----------------------- 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Our school will offer multiple face-to-face meetings with parents and families throughout the school year. Parent-teacher conferences are scheduled three times a year. In addition, every Tuesday we have thirty minutes of Family Engagement time scheduled from 2:30 through 3:00 PM. Our Family Engagement time is used for faculty, including teachers, the guidance counselor, attendance teacher or other support staff, to meet face-to-face with families and or call parents to discuss the student's academic and social progress. _------------------------- -------------------- ------------------- interpretation service(s)? This information is provided either monthly, or as needed basis depending on the document. Monthly newsletters go home, and parent teacher conference dates and shared quarterly. We use DOE Intranet templates for covered languages, as well as school personnel, as well as the interpretation services available via over the phone translation. --------------- -------------------- --------------------- ------------------ ---------------------- ---------------------- 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use school personnel, as well as the over the phone translation in order to assist in the communication between the school and our families. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Language Access Coordinator and team will turnkey training on language access to all staff members. Information about over the phone translation is also shared with all staff members via email and in paper form in the mailboxes. This information is also shared on the staff newsletter each week. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will fulfill parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation services by ensuring that the aforementioned checklst of notification requirements is current and complete. The welcome poster is posted in a conspicuous location near the primary entrance to the school. Copies of the parents' Bill of Rights and Guide to Language Access are distributed upon registration and made available throughout the school year. Finally, the Language ID guide is available and visible at our security desk and in our main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school uses multiple mechanisms to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of translation and interpretation services. Parent surveys are distributed at the beginning, middle and end of the year to monitor effectiveness of available services. Informal parents interviews are also used to gauge quality. 2018-19 SCEP-P 74 
