2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X030 School Name: P.S. 030 WILTON Principal: DEBRA MICHAUX 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 30x -Wilton School 07X030 320700010030 Elementary School Number (DBN): 510 East 141st Street, Bronx, NY 10454 718-292-8817 718-292-3962 Phone Number: Debra Michaux School Contact Person: Principal: Fax: Email Address: dmichau@schools.nyc.gov Ms. Debra Michaux Mr. Carlos Lopez UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Ms. Susana Flores Carlos Lopez Mr. Cesar Dominguez Martinez N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mr. Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Cortland Avenue, Room 102, Bronx, NY 10451 ralvarez4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 Ext. 425 718-828-6239 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 ZeregaAvenue, Bronx, NY 10462 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-8895 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Debra Michaux Carlos Lopez Susana Flores Felicia Willis YajairaBlanco N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) QumishaArtis Samantha Diaz NikeitaSimmons Ramona De Clerc Crystal Aguila AriseydaVasquez Nancy Sanchez N/A Ana Vazquez N/A Teacher Teacher Teacher Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Our mission at PS 30X- The Wilton School is to provide every student with a quality education. We Teach through the expectations of the Common Core that delivers high quality academic standards in English Language Arts, Mathematics and all content areas. We guide students to Reach their full potential and Inspire them to graduate high school with the necessary skills to be college, community, and career ready. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 30X serves a diverse population. Our school demographic is as follows: Total Number of Students 580 Average Daily Attendance 90% Asian 2% Black 22% Hispanic 74% White 2% Free Lunch 95% Students with Disabilities 24% English as a New Language 16% In order for us to continue improving our practice to provide a quality education for our students, we have partnered with community-based organizations that will impart families and the community. The community makeup being 95% low income and disadvantages, impacting student lives begin with the home life, health and social-emotional well-being. We established partnerships with the United Way, New York Food Bank; and Empire in collaboration with East Side House. Through this organizations, families are provided with food and academic supplies from school bags to snacks to classroom resources. Empire impacts students via an after-school program from K to Grade 5 to provide learning supports through STEM and the Arts. We also are partnered with World Vision where teachers have access to a plethora of scholastic resources, health related resources and student incentives. We collaborate with neighboring schools that reflect similar demographic makeup to have teachers inter-visit the teachers from the other schools to open their perspectives on their practice. We also have two teachers that are part of the NYC Teacher Leadership Pathways serving as a Model Teacher and a Peer Collaborative Teacher. Their role is to set up a model environment and times for teachers to come and view practice to be able to open up discussions on teaching and learning to change the practice of all. In addition, the District has created teacher-based professional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  development that is ongoing for the whole school year. The learning is taken back to the school and is turn-keyed to all staff to implement in an immediate turn-around within teaching practice across all grades. We hold a Saturday Success Academy for Title I and Title III programs. These partnerships are allowing our schools to reach more students in and around the community. In the academic year 2018-2019, we opened our second 3K classroom for three year old children. The initiatives tied to these classrooms are as follows: * Early Childhood Instructional Coordinator, is providing support for our teachers with a focus on early childhood development * PK Social Worker, is providing support for teachers, paraprofessionals, and parents for the social-emotional development of the students. *Integration of the 3K/Pre-K Common Core. *Training and focus on Work Sampling. *Development and instituting of student centers. In the academic school year 2018-2019, we continue to receive additional support of a Universal Literacy (ULIT) Coach. Her focus is Grades K-2. She mentors, models, observes, gives feedback and co-plans with all K-2 teachers. The ULIT coach also works with individual students implementing the Reading Rescue Program. Through the Universal Literacy grant, the school received varied content texts to support classroom libraries. In 2017 P.S. 30 cumulatively for Grades 3, 4 and 5 had 23.7% of all students tested score at Level 3 or 4, and 18% of all students test score a Level 3 or 4 on the NYS Mathematics Exam. We have only accomplished small gains, but have adopted Wonders, a new ELA curriculum, partnered with Generation Ready for ELA and National Teacher Network (NTN) for Math support, and have expanded our number of teachers pushing in and pulling out for RtI support in both ELA and Math. We are continuing our work to improve scores across the board and to further close the achievement gap among black and Hispanic students, students with disabilities, and English as a New Language Learners. We must do more to support these children, and all children, so they graduate from high school prepared to handle college-level coursework and the demands of a 21st century career. Parents, teachers, students, and administrators are essential partners in this process. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  Students with Disabilities (SWD's) In an ongoing process of addressing the needs of all students, PS30 has created an Integrated Co-Teaching Class on each grade (with exception of Grade 4), provides at-risk RTI students and mandated students with a SETSS Program, and supports adaptations in curriculum, pacing, instruction and assessment. Some of these adaptations include small group instruction, one-to-one, scaffolding, slower pacing, graphic supports, and the use of manipulatives, streamlining content and modified tasks/student outcomes. We have self-contained 12:1 and 12:1:1 classes on various grade levels to support the access and academic needs of students in a small, nurturing environment. These settings also provide extra focus and support with social-emotional needs [Addressing needs of the Whole Child]. English As A New Language Learners (ENL's) Dual Language Students designated with ENL/ELL status are given choice as to the program that best supports their need. Currently, PS30 has a Dual Language classroom on every grade Pre-K to Grade 5. Students are instructed in English in all content areas in an alternating weekly model [50-50 Model]. Students are also instructed in their native language, Spanish, to support the transition from their native home language to the English language. ESL Students in monolingual classes with ENL/ELL status are given English as a Second Language supports (ESL) from a licensed pedagogue. The ESL teacher conducts a push-in program where there is constant communication and planning with the classroom teachers with said students. The ESL teacher in conjunction with the classroom teach taps into the seven co-teaching models to instruct and integrate the ENL/ELL students to the greatest degree possible. Students are given appropriate scaffolding as needed with a strong focus on vocabulary acquisition. The ESL teacher also provides the needed supports to the classroom teachers to best instruct the ENL/ELL students on an ongoing basis. Saturday Academy and Road to Success Programs These programs are designated for entitled students in Grades 2-5. Student selection criteria are based on data from NYS Exam scores and F&P data. Students ranging from 2.4 to 2.9 (Approach Standard) are invited to attend to address ELA and Math skills and strategies more intensively. CookShop Early childhood teachers Grades Prek-2 have been trained and participate in the CookShop Program. The program provides students with a rich hands-on Science curriculum that investigates the science of Nutrition and teaches 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  students the rudiments of healthy eating. Students participate in meal preparation and food science learning everything from where food comes from to how to identify elements of a healthy diet. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. With respect to the Framework Element, Collaborative Teachers, we have been making progress. PS30x has incorporated both common planning and data inquiry periods for each respective grade embedded into the master schedule on a weekly basis. Each Grade Team meeting focuses on curriculum; and Common Core alignment with respect to unit plans and time lines. Data Inquiry periods focus on assessment data, formative data and student work to draw assumptions and conclusions on the teaching and learning. Teachers identify an area(s) of need and create action plans with respect to instituting new or focused skills and/or strategies to create an effect in student learning. Grade Teams all utilize school-wide protocols and document the work on an ongoing basis into school-wide artifact templates. Teacher teams analyze student work, create, revise and norm rubrics, all with the ultimate goal of improving instruction and differentiating for individual needs. The team conversations are a pathway for the teachers to a greater understanding of the types of supports that are needed in order to assist children reach rigorous new standards and to improve their instruction. Modifications and revisions are made to the selected components to ensure that our large population of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities receive effective instruction planned with alignment to the CCLS. Vocabulary is an area of focus for PS30. Teacher across the grades will analyze trends in student writing with particular focus on academic vocabulary. They will chart the trends and move towards their "next steps". This work will build students’ academic vocabulary and as a result, improve student writing across subject areas. Teachers also share and inform on their own professional learning. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  The Core Instructional Team which consists of a representative from different content areas, as well as Administrators, meets weekly. Meetings provide opportunities for discussions regarding instruction, strategic decisions that affect student achievement, and the school’s day-to-day operations. At PS 30X, we pride ourselves in building a community with teachers, students, and parents; which falls under the Elements, Supportive Environment and Strong Family-Community Ties. Some of our strengths include: - Holding Family Events for our students and parents (Literacy Night, Science Night, Math Night, and Family Game Night) - Creating and distributing monthly newsletters by grade -Creation of a school-wide Parent Newsletter - Teacher Leaders create After-School Enrichment Programs (dance, music, and fine arts). - Integrating clubs during the lunch periods to expose students to various types of activities (photography, cheerleading, step, fitness, percussion, piano, basketball, science). - Including the lower grades in both Saturday and after-school programs to enhance reading skills through Reading Alliance as well as providing a unit on “Testing as a Genre” for second grade. -Encouraging Special Education and Dual Language teachers to participate in our Saturday and after-school programs in order to best meet our SWDs and ENLs’ needs. - Enhancing student learning by implementing various technological resources (e.g. iPads, SMARTBOARD, Galaxy Tablets, MacBook’s, Lenovo laptops and tablets, Clicker school). This current School Year 2018-2019, we have three foci: 1 . As per Chancellor Carranza, we are focusing on increasing achievement in the second grade to better prepare them for the rigor of the upper grades. Our goal is to assist every second grade student to read on grade level before reaching the third grade. This includes the Universal Literacy initiative. 2. As per the data from the 2016-2017 Quality Review, with respect to Indicator 1.2, we are focusing on the alignment and consistency across classroom for each respective grade specifically with qualities of rigor and differentiation to meet the needs of every student and push student achievement. 3. Our PS 30X Instructional Focus is to create student centered tasks that will keep students engaged using effective questioning and discussion techniques while developing academic vocabulary to increase proficiency in all content areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X030 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 559 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 67 70 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 9 25 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 88.4% % Reduced Lunch 19.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 73.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.09 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 75% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 55 50 7 89.3% 0.9% 19.3% 22.5% 1.3% 0.9% 4 5% 5.1 18.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A NO YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A NO NO YSH N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed N/A x N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Framework Elements that are integrated within this goal area are Rigorous Instruction; Collaborative Teachers; and Effective School Leadership. School Strength Based on the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 94% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that in planning their last instructional unit, they had the resources and tools they needed to include multiple opportunities for students to interact with academic language. According to the school assessment data, there was an increase in levels 2-4 in ELA from 48% in 2016 to 52% in 2017. School's Needs Based on the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 68% of teachers reported that they have a moderate to great deal of influence over school policy in the area of developing instructional materials. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Based on the 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, 71% of teachers responded that a lot or all of their students in their classes use data or text references to support their ideas. Priority Need Teachers have access to instructional materials; however, teachers need to build capacity to modify the resources to meet the needs of all students and improve writing across all the content areas. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will move one rubric level as measured by the 4-point rubric for Writing on Demand assessments, as a result of an increase in teachers modifying writing instruction and writing units. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Instructional Based Programs: Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, instructional team Teachers, Instructional Leads and supervisor Teachers will use narrative, informational, and opinion writing rubrics to assess student writing, while aligning it to Wonders Writing Units, during curriculum planning. Teachers will focus on narrative writing by utilizing the following categories on the rubric to further develop students writing style: overall, lead, transition, ending, elaboration, craft and structure, spelling and grammar, punctuation. [Rationale: to build student familiarity with rubric criteria, components, and language]. Teachers will explicitly teach the writing process: planning, drafting, revising, editing, and publishing across all genres of writing through the content areas. Strategies: Teachers will provide differentiated graphic organizers and templates for all students to use. Teachers will use and provide students with vocabulary cards, sight word lists, and sentence starters for ENL students, and teachers will encourage students to use them throughout the lesson. Teachers will use exemplar writing provided by wonders to model the writing process and genre writing features. Sept 2018-Feb. 2019 Mar 2019- Jun 2019 Administration, instructional team, ENL Coordinator, SWD Liaison. All students Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20 Administration, instructional team, grade leaders, classroom teachers All students Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 [Specific dates for benchmarks in October, February, and May] All students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Administration, instructional team, grade leaders, classroom teachers, Literacy Consultants Assessment and Monitoring: Students will self-assess their writing using the categories on the modified rubrics, the writing process, modified and Wonders writing checklists, and self-assessment rings. Students will keep track of their writing progress by analyzing their results using the rubrics and checklists and organizing their information in their data binders. Teacher will lead teacher-student conferences in which students’ needs will be addressed through conversation, prompting questions, ideas, and resources. During the course of the year, teachers will administer 3 benchmark writing on demands with narrative writing being the focus. Teachers will meet weekly during common planning/data meetings to plan and adjust units and lessons based on data (as per curriculum planning grade units). Professional Learning Literacy consultants will support teachers with curriculum professional development as well as resources to support students’ writing needs. Teachers will complete peer observations to share strategies and resources, and to provide feedback that will support teacher pedagogy. A group of teachers will engage in a book study for “The Writing Strategies Book” by Jennifer Serrano to develop a toolbox of strategies to effectively teach writing. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will schedule workshops for parents on Tuesday during parent engagement to introduce them to the writing units. ELA and Math Workshops to provide parents with testing strategies, test sophistication, and the format and content of the Common Core Exams to support student writing. Title III Parent Workshop series during the Saturday Academy to support student writing. Maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between all staff members and families to support student development of reading comprehension. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The schedule will be adjusted for teachers to meet with instructional facilitators to discuss and analyze lesson plans and lesson delivery on a weekly basis. Notebooks and writing portfolios will be provided for all subject areas to all students.As such, funds will be allotted in the budget to purchase the notebooks. Adjustment to the schedule will be done on an ongoing basis, in order to provide time for inter-class visitations for teachers to observe best practices in the building. Supplies will be needed to create anchor charts for student discussion and differentiated activities. Ready NY writing books will be purchased for all grades. Our Generation Ready ELA Consultant will be working closely with teachers to plan effective writing lessons. For the aforementioned, funds will be allotted in the budget to purchase these materials and services. Teacher will receive Professional Development to implement the modified Writing units on Professional Development Mondays. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all students will make a gain of 0.5 increase in the Writing on Demand assessment performance level as measured by a four point modified rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Writing on Demand assessment with a focus on Narrative writing. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A x N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs based on Data: When students take ownership of their work, they accept accountability. Students can own their work when they know what they’ve done well and what they need to improve on. When students are able to self-assess, they are bridging the gap between ownership and accountability. There is a school-wide need to improve student self-assessment practices to impact student achievement. Based on the 2016-17 School Quality Guide: 74% of teachers responded that a lot of the students respond to challenging questions in class. 76% of teachers responded that a lot of the students in their classes build on each other’s ideas during class discussion. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  71% of teachers responded that a lot of the students in their classes use data or text references to support their ideas. 74% of the teachers responded that a lot of the students in their classes provide constructive feedback to their peers/ teachers. Based on the 2016-17 School Quality Guide, Indicator 1.2, Pedagogy, the school was rated Developing. Although students were encouraged to collaborate with one another, student participation in small groups and student-to-student discussion in large group settings were limited. Additionally, academic tasks did not afford opportunities for student choice, and extensions for higher performing students were not always in place. According to the review, students did not build on one another’s responses. Many teachers are not encouraging peer-to-peer discussions. Furthermore, it was found that our students didn’t question one another. School Priority Need(s) Creating student ownership of learning through self-monitoring and self-assessment. Students empowered to take risks. Students effectively apply feedback. Students self-monitoring is formatively tracked. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 70% increase in Classroom Dojo points school- wide in the use of student self-assessment and self-monitoring tools as compared to the October Benchmark to the June Benchmark. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers: Teachers and educational assistants will be provided with professional learning sessions to support them in implementing self-assessment tools in their classroom. Teachers will receive training to teach their students how to self-assess. Teachers will create a safe and supportive environment in which students’ mistakes are celebrated. Teachers will encourage students to use self-assessment rings to monitor their own understanding. Teachers will share best practices about implementing self-assessment tools in their classroom through inter-class visitations and team meetings. Teachers will provide students with exemplars to clearly demonstrate what students are expected to do. Teachers Para- September 2018- June 2019 professionals Students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Instructional team, Literacy coach Model teachers and Peer Collaborative Teacher Teachers, consultants instructional team, literacy coach and Peer Collaborative Teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Teachers will provide students with comprehensible goals and expectations. Learning targets will be clear and understood by the students. Teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers will receive training in using the Dojo monitoring tool to track student learning achievement. Teachers will create a category to track students’ use of self-monitoring and self-assessment tools on the Dojo system. Teachers: Teachers and educational assistants will be provided with professional learning sessions to support them in implementing self-assessment tools in their classroom. Teachers will receive training to teach their students how to self-assess. Teachers will create a safe and supportive environment in which students’ mistakes are celebrated. Teachers will encourage students to use self-assessment rings to monitor their own understanding. Teachers will share best practices about implementing self-assessment tools in their classroom through interclass visitations and team meetings. Teachers will provide students with exemplars to clearly demonstrate what students are expected to do. Teachers will provide students with comprehensible goals and expectations. Learning targets will be clear and understood by the students. Teachers will receive training in using the Dojo monitoring tool to track student learning achievement. Teachers will create a category to track students’ use of self-monitoring and self-assessment tools on the Dojo system. Student self-assessment: Students will self-assess their writing in order to identify their strengths and areas of focus to set realistic and achievable writing goals. Teachers Para- September 2018- June 2019 professionals Instructional team, Literacy coach Model teachers and Peer Collaborative Teacher Students and teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Team, Literacy coach and Peer Collaborative Teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Students will revise and edit their writing using a rubric and checklist. Students will track their own progress. Students will reflect on their Writing on Demand which will be administered 3 times a year. (October, February, May) Peer-to-peer feedback: Students Students will share their writing with a peer and provide feedback. and teachers Students will utilize a writing checklist and a rubric to provide suggestions to improve their writing. Students will use the Glows and Grows template to provide feedback. Teacher to student feedback : Students Teachers will model how students evaluate their own learning. and teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Team, Literacy coach and Peer Collaborative Teacher. September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Team, Literacy coach and Peer Collaborative Teacher. Teachers will provide constant and effective student feedback. Teachers will share next steps and goals during Writing Workshops and Data Talks. Teachers will provide supports like checklists, posters, and organizers to help students begin to independently self-monitor and self-assess. Checks for Understanding: Students will be responsible for their own learning and check their understanding during instruction through the ongoing use of the workshop model of planning and the gradual release of responsibility. Through discussions, students will compare their responses with their peers, hear the reasoning behind the response and make adjustments to their own thinking. Student-led conferences Teachers will prepare and support students to take ownership of their learning. Students will organize and maintain data and Wonders writing portfolios to track their learning progress. Students will be empowered and take the lead in communicating and reflecting on their learning. Students and teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Team, Literacy coach and Peer Collaborative Teacher. Students and teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Team, Literacy coach and Peer Collaborative Teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Students will gain confidence and show pride in sharing their learning. Instructional Team Team will develop a student survey responding to the use of self-assessment and self-assessment tools. Team will collect and analyze Dojo data monthly. Results will be used to compare against the survey taken three times throughout the year. The team will provide professional learning to teachers regarding implementation and usage of Dojo. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students and teachers September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Instructional Team, Literacy coach and Peer Collaborative Teacher. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. At our September Open House, teachers will meet with parents to inform them of our school’s writing initiative and student-led conferences. During parent engagement, teachers will plan parent workshops to provide strategies they can use at home to support their children with writing. Students will have opportunities during parent engagement to invite their parents to student-led conferences. Teachers will provide parents with updates on their child’s progress in writing during parent engagement, parent teacher conferences and scheduled meetings. Teachers will send home monthly grade newsletters Parents will be informed and communicate with teachers in an ongoing fashion through the Classroom DoJo parent communication piece of the DoJo app. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The PBIS/Brain Power team will meet on a monthly basis to discuss strategies on implementing the program and to ensure continual success. Time be allotted for teachers to meet during the day; therefore, PBIS/Brain Power team members will meet one Monday a month. They will engage in professional learning to enhance the PBIS program. Special assemblies, activities and trips will be necessary to motivate the students to engage in positive behaviors. The school will set aside time for these monthly activities to take place during the school day. In addition, we will need the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  resources to reward students for their positive behavior. Funds will be allotted to purchase items from World Vision for the PBIS student store. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will increase in DoJo points school-wide by 35% as compared to the October benchmark. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Classroom DoJo Monitoring Tool Percentages (monthly) Student survey (three benchmarks) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A N/A using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Framework Elements that are integrated within this goal area are Rigorous Instruction; Supportive Environment; Collaborative Teachers; and Effective School Leadership. School Strength(s) -Based on the 2016-2017 Quality Snapshot, 95% of PS 30 teachers say that teachers at this school work together to design instructional programs (City: 93%). -Based on the 2016-2017 Quality Snapshot, 89% of PS 30 teachers say that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school (City: 88%). -As measured in the 2016-2017 Quality Review Guide, PS 30 rated 91% (3.36) in Common Core Shifts in Literacy and Math under the Rigorous Instruction component of the Framework for Great Schools. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  School Needs -As measured in the 2016-2017 Quality Review Guide, PS 30 rated “Developing” in the Quality Indicator: 1.2 Pedagogy. Teaching strategies inconsistently provide multiple entry points and high quality support and extensions into the curricula for all students, and there are often missed opportunities for students to demonstrate higher-order thinking skills and work products. Student groups are organized thoughtfully for instruction but do not always build on student strengths to maximize student learning. -As measured in the 2016-2017 Quality Review Guide, PS 30 rated 78% (3.35) in Common Core Shifts in Quality of Student Discussions under the Rigorous Instruction component of the Framework for Great Schools. -As measured in the 2016-2017 Quality Review Guide, 74% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the students in their classes provide constructive feedback to their peers/teachers. Priority Needs -Create Model Classrooms and Lab-sites to set school-wide expectations. -Develop schedules for inter-class visitations. -Build a clear lens for their own and colleagues’ best practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will collaborate with colleagues to develop writing pedagogy and best practices through the use of inter-visitations, model classrooms, and lab-sites that will result in all teachers improving one HEDI level in component 1a of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, Instructional Team Grade team leaders, Teachers, Support staff All Staff Teachers, paraprofessionals, and clusters September 2018-June 2019 Monthly Weekly Common Prep Biweekly Data Inquiry Meeting Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Professional Development Teachers will be provided with differentiated professional development opportunities to deepen their knowledge and understanding of the writing process and empower students to use rubrics and writing checklists to assess their own writing. Writing Data Inquiry and Grade Teams Meetings Teachers will meet, discuss, and analyze student data portfolios and student reflections. Teachers will develop formulations for high-leverage feedback and actionable next steps to move individualized students forward as per their individualized short and long term goals as measured through the Glows and Grows template. Teachers will develop strategies to push student’s writing stamina to develop more well rounded writers. Teachers will have multiple opportunities to visit the Model Classrooms and Lab Site to observe Writing lessons, strategies, student groupings, and effective student feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Teachers will be provided with various modeled classrooms to visit: Ms. Vargas and Ms. Vega (ICT-kindergarten), Ms. Olea (Dual Language-fifth grade), Ms. Pena (Math), Ms. Dunner (Special Ed-12:1), Ms. Borkes (General Ed-fifth grade), Ms. Colon (Dual Language-second grade) Teachers will be offered monthly PLCs by the Instructional Leads addressing the Writing Workshop Resources and Tools All Teachers and Paraprofessionals September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional Team Grade team leaders, Teachers, Support staff Monthly Weekly Common Prep Biweekly Data Inquiry Meeting Teachers will be responsible for completing the self-assessment performance tool, TAG, and intervisitation form after each class visit/observation. Teachers will utilize the Self-Peer-Teacher Feedback tool for performance tasks and student work pieces. Teachers will take and maintain logs of individualized formative assessments, conference notes and goals/next steps for each student in their class. Teachers will guide students and maintain data folders or notebooks (as per grade): reviewing, updating and annotating as necessary in an ongoing manner across the entire school year. Teachers will conduct individualized student conferences. Teachers will conduct individualized student Data Talks utilizing all feedback and data tools. Special Education Meeting and Dual Language Meeting SWDs And ENLs September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Instructional Team Special Ed teachers, Related Monthly Grade team leaders, Teachers, Support staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Monthly sessions will be conducted for Dual Language and Special Education teachers. All Special Education and Dual Language teachers participate and rotate facilitating the sessions throughout the year. Service providers, and Paraprofessionals Weekly Common Prep Biweekly Data Inquiry Meeting Teachers participate in professional learning on a monthly basis and turn key information. The Special Ed and Dual Language liaison will provide important information, keep everyone updated and in compliance. Training on SESIS and writing quality IEPs will be provided as needed. Student-Teacher Conferencing Teachers and Students Teachers will be equipped to provide effective student feedback/next steps and goals during Writing Workshops and Data Talks as a result of teacher collaboration and professional learning communities. Students will participate in teacher/student data discussions and goal setting during writing workshop and data talks. Students will progress to peer data discussions and finally self-progress monitoring by utilizing student rubrics, glows and grows, and checklists. Administration, Instructional Leads, and Peer Collaborative Teacher Administration, Instructional Team Grade team leaders, Teachers, Support staff September 2018-June 2019 Monthly Weekly Common Prep Biweekly Data Inquiry Meeting Classroom teachers and support staff Sept 2018- June 2019 Minimum 3x per year (November 2018, February Administration Instructional Leads Peer Collaborative Teacher Consultants 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35 2019, May 2019) Create cycles of monitoring and review of Teachers’ intervisitations, self-assessment rubrics, and peer-teacher review completed Have collaborative conversations with teachers to discuss professional growth, strengths, and areas for improvement. Create cycles of monitoring and review of Data Folders, Data Notebooks, student self-assessments rubrics and checklist for Writing, and teacher self-assessment and peer teacher feedback. -Conduct cycles of observations and walkthroughs with a focus on the Writing Workshop: teachers’ lessons, strategies, student groupings, and effective student feedback Have Data conversations with teachers utilizing all feedback and data tools as evidence of moving students at their respective levels. Monitor, attend, and become active participants in grade and inquiry meetings for all grades. Conduct cycles of observations and walkthroughs with the focus of students self assessing, peer assessing and leading the advancement of their own work in Writing. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will have monthly data-talk meetings with parents and students. These will take place during parent engagement. These meetings will provide strategies for the parents to help their child with school work at home. Parent Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  P.S. 30X staff will provide workshops for parents with a focus on ENLs and SWDs, highlighting activities that families can do to support what is being taught inside the classroom during Writing Workshop. Monthly grade newsletters stating the focus units of study in ELA and the content areas (math, science, social studies). Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning, common grade planning period, common data meetings, common prep with ENLs and SpEd teachers, print rich environment, Smart boards and parent workshops. Teacher meetings will be held during school hours. Therefore, the daily schedule will be adjusted to allow teachers to meet on a weekly basis. Parent meetings will be conducted on Tuesday Parent Engagement days. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers will demonstrate the ability to effectively engage students during the Writing Workshop as a result of collaborating, observing, and implementing best practices. Data will be gathered via the review of teacher self-assessment rubrics, and peer-teacher feedback. Upon analyzing the data, we will note our progress and tailor our action plan as needed. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Instruments of measure include the teacher self-assessment rubrics, and peer-teacher feedback forms. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A N/A x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school needs to meet the expectations of 21st Century Teaching and Learning to establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations and shared accountability to staff, students, and families; and provide supports to achieve those expectations. To push forward to meet the global economic demands, school leaders need to communicate high expectations. In nurturing future leaders, teachers will take part in shared leadership and transparent thinking. Administration is taking into account the needs of all teachers and staff members in taking on an active leadership role in the educational community. Data Showing the Need for Growth: * On the 2016-2017 School Quality Review, P.S.30 rated Proficient on the Quality Review Indicators of High Expectations (3.4); and Teacher Teams and Leadership Development. * On the 2016 New York State English Language Arts (ELA) Exams, overall for Grades 3, 4 and 5, 15% of students scored proficient, and in 2017, 22% of students scored proficient. That is an increase in 7% of Proficient students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  * On the 2016 New York State Mathematics Exams, overall for Grades 3, 4 and 5, 8% of students scored proficient, and in 2017 19% of students scored proficient. That is an increase in 11% of Proficient students. * On the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, in the area of Collaborative Teachers on the Framework for Great Schools, P.S.30 rated, Good. For, Growth on State Tests, in ELA we rated, Fair, for both, All Students at this School and the School’s Lowest Performing Students. For, Growth on State Tests, in Mathematics we rated, Good, for All Students at this School, and Fair, for the School’s Lowest Performing Students. Areas of Celebration: 77% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school take responsibility for improving the school. 89% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school. 74% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that overall, their professional development experiences this year have included opportunities to work productively with teachers from other schools For School Commitment we scored 71% positive. -We scored, Proficient, on How thoughtful the school’s approach to teacher development and evaluation? And How well do teachers work with each other? The school leaders will continue to reinforce high expectations and shared accountability via meetings, teacher feedback and professional literature. Our Priority Needs are: To communicate high expectations and shared accountability. To strengthen a culture of professional learning through professional learning communities, i.e. professional learning cycles, teacher teams, vertical teams. To strengthen the school’s distributive leadership by including more teachers in various leadership roles. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will develop leadership roles by leading a professional learning session or heading an initiative that incorporates P.S. 30’s writing focus. This will result in an increase in performance levels in Domain 4 as measured by the Danielson Framework. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will be provided opportunities to facilitate grade and vertical team meetings by a set rotating schedule. To ensure full participation of the staff, these times are embedded into the Master Schedule. Schedules will be revised and adjusted to maximize time for joint planning, collaborative examination of student work, inter-visitations and debriefing, effective practice sharing, and discussions. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and Teachers There will be an active use of protocols to govern Inquiry Teams. All teachers October 2018 - June 2019 Administration and Teachers Transparent communication between the school community, School Leadership Team (SLT) on how school administration is continually nurturing the professional growth of teachers and staff. Administration, Staff and Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and School Leadership Team (SLT) Establishment of a Professional Learning Team (PLT). Select teachers will be an extension of the School Wide Leadership Instructional Cabinet (SLIC) Team. This team will be comprised of representatives for the upper grades, lower grades, cluster position, Dual Language and Special Education. The team will plan and adjust the Professional Learning Schedule. All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and PLT members PLT meetings will occur every other Tuesday from 3:30 to 3:50. All teachers Minutes [meeting notes] from the professional development meetings will be distributed to the staff. All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and PLT membersMinutes [meeting notes] from the professional development meetings will be distributed to the staff. Administration and PLT membersMinutes [meeting notes] from the professional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  All Teachers will participate in teacher-led workshops. All teachers will participate in what will be termed, “Deepening the Knowledge of Content Sessions,” led by their colleagues. All teachers Teacher meetings with administration, quarterly, to assess each pedagogue’s own professional growth, student growth and needs, supports, and areas for growth. All teachers All teachers Administration will ensure there is a shared calendar that lists all assemblies, testing dates, schedule changes for the entire school year and will ensure that the calendar is maintained in a manner that keeps it up to date. Administration will communicate clearly the mission of the school, will educate the staff on the CEP during a Monday PD, and will allow time for regular staff review and inputs on the CEP during various Monday PD. On a full day PD during the fall, the staff will be provided the opportunity to present the work they would like to accomplish in more detail. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement development meetings will be distributed to the staff. Administration and PLT members Administration Administration September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 [Benchmark Dates] September 2018 All teachers October 2018 Administration and CEP sub-committees All Teachers December 2018 CEP sub-committees How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Grade Teams send out monthly communication about specific grade and school events, and academic content foci. Teachers communicate with via parents through the Classroom DoJo App to keep parents up-to-date. On Parent Engagement Tuesdays, teachers will head up specific workshops of interest for parents. Parents will be encouraged to take more active roles within the SLT and community-based events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Money allocations for: Outside targeted professional development; supplies and resources needed as a result of inter-visitations, i.e. needed next steps; coverage for teachers needing extra time for visits Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of teachers will have taken on leadership roles by participating in school-wide committees, leading workshops for colleagues, mentoring other teachers, modeling instruction, or leading meetings as measured by the teacher survey. In addition, the same percentage of teachers will move one percentage level in 4d as measured by the ADVANCE rating system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Staff will use a Google form survey labeled “P.S.30 Distributive Leadership Survey" to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. x 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. N/A SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Framework Elements that are integrated within this goal area are Rigorous Instruction; Supportive Environment; Collaborative Teachers ; Effective School Leadership; Strong Family-Community Ties; and Trust. School Strength(s) -According to our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot: 95% of parents responded positively to questions about Strong Family-Community ties. 96% of parents say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how the staff can help their children learn. 95% of parents say that school staff work hard to build trusty relationships with them. 100% of parents say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet students’ needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  -Regular communication with families and high expectations for student academic achievement is being addressed through the use of newsletters, monthly calendars, school event notices, and highlighted on students' perfect attendance boards. -There is reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders as evidenced by the collaboration between our parent coordinator and teachers. The parent coordinator invites community members to host various workshops to inform parents of health, housing, and educational opportunities. This collaboration helps to ensure students' learning is optimized. School Priority Need(s) Address the specific needs of the parents in the community. Supply parents with an active voice to augment and tailor workshops and improve outreach to community agencies to better serve their immediate needs and issues. Communicate to parents that their active involvement has a direct impact on their child’s school success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parent attendance as compared to the attendance of the 2017-2018 academic year through the P.S. 30 Parent Academy sessions that will focus on the importance of parent involvement. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Sept 2018- Teachers, Administration Teachers will encourage students to maintain Wonders Writing Portfolios for each unit, which contains published writing pieces. All staff members June 2019 Teachers will administer Writing on Demand (WOD) B_M_E throughout the year to monitor growth. Teachers will host Wonders Unit Writing Celebrations to celebrate student successes. Attendance Team, teachers, administrators, secretaries, family workers, Attendance teacher  Parents All staff members Monthly Parents will attend monthly workshops to learn and engage in writing activities. During Parent Engagement, they will acquire skills, strategies and tools to support their children. Parents will participate in monthly Literacy Workshops aimed at strengthening the reading and writing mindset. The workshops will also focus on correcting* parent literacy deficits. Additionally, parents will become well versed in attendance guidelines that adhere to PS.30’s attendance policy, modeling best practice for student academic success. During the Writing Celebration, parents will work with their child/ student and provide “Parent to Student” feedback, using a specific writing checklist. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45 All staff members Sept.2018- Jun 2019 Parent Coordinator Instructional Team All staff members Sept.2018- Jun 2019 Parent Coordinator Instructional Team Students Students will create a piece of published writing each month from the current Unit in Wonders. Three days a week students will complete Quick Writes, to use in future writing tasks. Student Led Discussion will be conducted to share student writing during Family Engagement especially with serious attendance concerns. Students will create invitations to ensure parents participate in the celebration. Students will participate in Monthly Attendance Celebrations. Parent Coordinator / Instructional Team The Parent Coordinator and the instructional team will collaborate to create a Parent Workshop Calendar, centered around student writing, while promoting the importance of student attendance on academic success Parent surveys will be created and distributed during parent engagement workshops, to elicit and generate immediate needs and wants, pertaining to writing and attendance. Principal will continue the Second Cup of Coffee with parents to build upon writing conversations leading to student perfect attendance . Parents will receive quarterly Principal’s messages which highlights active parent involvement. Teachers will provide resources specifically for SpEd and ELL families. Teachers will instruct parents on the latest instructional strategies through the use of technology. To help parents help their children, video links, lessons and concept videos will be uploaded through Classroom Dojo. PS 30x’s Technology Designee, will update the school’s website monthly to keep parents and the community abreast of PS 30x events and happenings. PS 30x will host an annual Family Game Night, Literacy Night, Math Night, Family Science Fair, Saturday afternoon Movie Night, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Saturday afternoon Paint and Chat, Zumba classes, Cultural Fair, Family Talent Show, Harvest Fest. Creation of a Parent Academy Team with representatives from the different areas of the school staff and community. Parent newsletters and Parent Open School Days/Nights. Bring Your Father to School Family events (ex. Literacy Night, Math Night, etc.) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our partnership with The United Way will provide resources for families to enhance school attendance. In addition, we will infused writing skills/strategies and tools with the arts/music assemblies to promote student perfect attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Teachers, School Counselors, and attendance team will meet to develop Incentives to encourage parent and family participation. Also, parent meetings will be held on a monthly basis. Funds will be allotted for incentives and meetings to be held. The funds will be allotted to acquire needed materials and resources for ongoing parent meetings and workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parent workshop and meeting sign-ins will be tabulated to calculate the percent of parent outreach. There will be a resulting increase in our parent involvement by 5% in attendance of these sessions based on attendance sheets for all parent events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2017-2018 NYC School Survey Parent Workshop and Meeting Sign-ins 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Parent Workshop Agendas Mid-Year Survey outlining Strong Family-Community Ties Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Analyzing student data and determining the students who fall in the bottom third of literacy assessments as well as students who are performing up to 2 grades below grade level. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, guided reading groups and one to one. Every Saturday during the Saturday Academy Program. Mondays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays during second period. Saturday Academy which consists of Title I, Title III and road To Success will begin in November 2018 through March 2019. The program will meet Saturdays from 8:00am - 12:30pm. Eight (10) certified teachers (bilingual/regular grade/special education/general education) will conduct intensive literacy instruction based on action plans developed for target students. PS 30 will have four classes of ELLs, these classes will be formed and organized based on the proficiency levels, reading scale scores and NYSESLAT levels. Instructional materials include leveled books (nonfiction), the reading and writing workshop model 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  will be used to address, vocabulary materials including magnetic letters, wipe off boards, word cards and other support materials. Students will develop fluency and comprehension through the use of Mondo libraries. ELA Intervention, During the literacy block time the coach and AIS provider will address AIS as a push in support for students. The coach will target areas in need by working with students in small groups and one-to-one. Learning centers will be set up to explore and practice strategies in small groups. This approach will reinforce new vocabulary and skills. 100 Minutes tutoring is conducted in groups of 5-10 students. Classes meet Tuesday and Wednesday from 2:35-3:25. All special needs students identified 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50 Small group, guided reading groups and one to one Every Saturday during the Saturday Academy Program. Mondays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays during second period. Small group, guided reading groups and one to one. During the school day. Mathematics Science Analyzing student data and determining the students who fall in the bottom third of mathematics assessments as well as students who are performing up to 2 grades below grade level. Analyzing student data and determining the students who fall in the bottom third of mathematics and literacy assessments as well as students who do not meet grade level standards. at-risk based on WADE results receive 90-miuntes of Wilson and/or Fundations instruction daily. 100 Minutes tutoring is conducted in groups of 5-10 students. Classes meetWednesday and Thursday from 2:35-3:25. A Ready NYC Pre-test is administered and analyzed by teachers; the instructional implications are reviewed in consultation with school leaders and based on results instruction is formulated. Grade 4 students will utilize Passages to reinforce Science vocabulary words and Simple Solutions, a supplemental homework program in Science that includes: pre-test, post-test and weekly quizzes. Grade 3-5 students will improve their conceptual understanding of science topics through authentic hands-on experiences in the science lab with the science cluster 3 times per week. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51 Small group, guided reading groups and one to one. During the school day. Small group, guided reading groups and one to one. During the school day. Social Studies Analyzing student data and determining the students who fall in the bottom third of literacy assessments as well as students who are not meeting grade level standards. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Based on the recommendations provided by a student’s Individualized Education Plan (IEP) as well as advice provided by the Child Study Team (CST). Grade 4 students will utilize Passages to reinforce Science vocabulary words and Simple Solutions, a supplemental homework program in Science that includes: pre-test, post-test and weekly quizzes. Grade 3-5 students will improve their conceptual understanding of science topics through authentic hands-on experiences in the science lab with the science cluster 3 times per week. Our mandated IEP counselor provides services to those entitled by their IEP’s and offers support to at-risk students. All of these support services are woven into a school fabric to better serve the community. Activities related to anger management, bereavement counseling, conflict resolution, play therapy and referral to mental health and community agencies. We also refer parents to the programs provided by East Side House 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Settlement which enables adults to continue with evening adult education courses (ESL, GED, and Computer Courses). These services provide the community with expanded opportunities for adults to continue their education as the means to attain self-fulfillment, both academically and economically. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 88 students in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. STH students will be provided with uniforms, school supplies (book bags, notebooks, etc), glasses, counseling service, and their families will have access to free nutritious food from our Food Pantry. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The strategies and activities used to attract highly qualified teachers are: The BEDS surveys will be monitored to ensure that status of teachers. Should the information on the BEDS survey indicate teachers are not highly qualified we will contact our HR person for support. • 100% of our teachers are highly qualified • In order to attract highly qualified teachers school administrators will be going to hiring fairs hosted by the DOE and City Universities. • School administrators will attend networking events and fairs hosted by Teach for America and New York Teaching Fellows. • Mentors are assigned to support struggling and unqualified teachers. • Teachers who need to complete courses will be made aware of options for release time or funds to support their certification requirements. • Continue ongoing PD for all teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). High quality professional development will be anchored in the CCLS, Danielson Framework, and Framework for Great Schools . The PD plan is differentiated to meet teachers' needs. All teachers will be given an opportunity to select from a menu of professional learning opportunities to develop their pedagogy to meet the needs of college and career readiness. The New Teacher Institute was developed to give new teachers an in depth professional development opportunity to support success. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Teacher Effectiveness ● Measures of Teacher Practice ● Generation Ready (formally AUSSIE) ● GoMath ● Wonders/Maravillas ● In House PD Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Orientation sessions in June for parents of children entering Kindergarten (Agenda and school brochure includes overview of school programs, non-negotiable school rules, uniform policy procedures (ingress and egress). School tours are available for parents and students. To place incoming kindergartners a baseline assessment is given to determine ready readiness. Open House in early September includes discussions about curriculum, student expectation, and parent involvement. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Weekly common planning sessions, where teachers follow a consistent protocol for looking at student work and making instructional decisions based on outcomes. Also, a data team will be formed to analyze student assessment data and decide on strategies that will be implemented to improve success in assessments. In addition, a teacher group is formed to make a decision on the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) to measure student success as well 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  as teacher efficiency Instructional leads and administrators are part of the data teams where decisions are made on assessments based on students' needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 485,870 N/A 72,612 85,758 14,926 0 3,146,007 Column A Verify with an (X) x N/A x x x x x Column B Section Reference(s) See Section 5a, 5c, and 5d N/A See Section 5a, 5c, and 5d See Section 5a, 5c, and 5d See Section 5a, 5c, and 5d See Section 5a, 5c, and 5d See Section 5a, 5c, and 5d 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 30x: Wilton, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 30X: Wilton will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 30X: Wilton , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by ESSA; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title 1 requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title 1 programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Based on the ELA, NYSESLAT, and Science State assessment scores our English Language Learners need improvement in the reading and writing modalities. It was established that language development was needed for students to be proficient in the curriculum that is aligned with the Common Core State Standards. As a result, we determined that ENL students in grades 1-5 in general education and special education classes (including new arrivals) will receive additional instruction during our Saturday Academy Program. This program will focus on developing academic vocabulary through use of an intensive reading and writing intervention program that will in turn increase reading comprehension and writing proficiency. By focusing on academic vocabulary, we will increase English language proficiency as well as reading comprehension and writing proficiency. There will be 4 classes for direct instruction. Students will grouped based on their English Language proficiency levels (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding/ Commanding) **for those students who are former ELLs and are entitled to services**) The service providers for the classes will be certified Childhood 1-6 teachers with an ESL or Bilingual Extension. Classes will rotate between teachers and maintain a 15:1 student-teacher ratio. This rotation will allow all students to receive instruction in the four modalities of learning English as a new or second language. Each class will teach a modality based on the NYSESLAT level thus differentiating for all students. The Title III ENL academy will begin November 2018 and will end March 2019. There will be a total of 15 instructional sessions for the Saturday Title III program. The program will meet from 8:30am to 12:30pm (The school will complement the cost of the Title III program, using other funding source). There will be 15 students to one teacher. The instructional materials being used include: Wonders, Discussions 4 Learning, iLit ELL, and National Geographic Science. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Part C: Professional Development In an effort to increase academic vocabulary across the grades, teachers with English Language Learners will be provided with Professional Development to teach them research based skills and strategies to teach their ENL students. In addition, teachers will be given additional support in using relevant data to drive their instruction and to find ways to better support ENLs. Topics for Professional Development include, but are not limited to: - ENL Teaching Strategies- Increasing academic vocabulary through the content area- Using data to drive instruction- The Common Core Standards and English Language Learners (new ENL standards. In addition to schoolwide professional development for teachers, all four (4) service providers for the Title III ENL Academy will be given professional development on how to use the language development programs that are being used. There will be one (1) professional development day on Saturday, October 2018 from 8:30am to 12:30pm. Professional Development: Unpacking ENL Resources and Planning8:45am-9:30am: Wonders9:35am-10:15am: Discussions 4 Learning10:20am-10:40am: Go Math! Unlocking Word Problems10:45am-12:15am: Planning For Saturday12:20am-12:30am: Questions Daniel Berdugo will be providing the professional development. He is currently serving as the ENL teacher and ELL coordinator at PS 30X. Mr. Berdugo is certified in Childhood 1-6 with a Bilingual Extension. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Parent Coordinator, in conjunction with the ENL teacher will work with parents of ELLs to ensure ongoing involvement in school activities. In addition, in order for parents to reinforce the academic vocabulary their children learn, an Adult ENL academy will be provided. The program will start November 2018 and will end March 2019. It will begin at 8:30am until 12:30pm. There will be fifteen (15) instructional sessions on Saturdays. The program will teach parents everyday English Language skills that is necessary to be a productive member of the community. In addition, parents will be taught technological skills so they can translate English in to their native language. Finally, guest speakers will be invited to speak on the following topics: - Immigration- Writing Workshop- Reading Workshop - Helping your child prepare for the NYS Assessments Parents will be notified of this program by sending letters in English and their Native Language as well as the Parent Coordinator reaching out to parents by calling them and inviting them to attend the program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name PS 30X: Wilton School Borough Bronx School Number 030 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Debra Michaux Coach Rosa Veras ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Daniel Berdugo Teacher/Subject Area Evelyn Gomez Teacher/Subject Area Riani Olea Related-Service Provider Gadyira Lopez Superintendent Elisa Alvarez Assistant Principal Maria Martinez Coach School Counselor Angela Stamps Parent Susanna Flores Parent Coordinator Ana Vasquez Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 602 Total number of ELLs 118 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.60% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish/English Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 6 0 0 6 K 1 2 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools our school uses to assess the early literacy skills of our ENLs are the Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Systems in English and Spanish. After analyzing the 2015-2016 NYSESLAT data and reflecting on the administration of the 2017 NYSESLAT, our ENLs have improved in the areas of reading and writing. However, they still need to achieve beyond the transitioning level. In addition to providing support in those areas, it will be important to develop and strengthen the Social Studies and Science curriculum to expose our students to the rich academic vocabulary and reading skills needed to develop a higher command of the English Language. This information assists in making data based decisions as well as adjustments to our instructional plan for ENLs. We have purchased a license for Flocabulary.com to teach our students academic vocabulary 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  via a platform that meets the needs of all of our ENLs. Our ENLs have access to iRead and My-On online programs that allows students to listen and read books independently at their level. The books range from various literary and informational texts that expose students to science and social studies topics. In addition to the online programs, we will be purchasing Maravillas to compliment the new Wonders ELA program to help develop the Native Language or Second Language in the Dual Language classrooms. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? P.S.30X will be receiving professional development to help support in the implementation of Wonders, the new ELA program. Specifically, support will be given to assist teachers in differentiating for ENLs in the monolingual classroom and the special education classroom. In addition, we will ensure that our Dual Language teachers receive the support to implement Maravillas.Over the past year, we have been purchasing iPad tablets and Chromebooks to support the technology aspect of our programs. For instance, students are able to access iRead and MyOn through the use of tablets and laptops. Moveover, classrooms have been equipped with new SMART Boards or Promethean Boards to provide a more interactive lesson for ENL students.Dual language teachers meet on a weekly basis to discuss the needs of the dual language programs. Teachers meet with the Instructional Team and the Team for Curriculum Planning to aide in the process. All teachers working with ENL's are provided ongoing professional learning opportunities. For the 2017-2019 academic years, dual language teachers will meet while using data to drive the decision making of the program. In addition, the ENL teachers will meet to discuss data and monitor the progress of the students in freestanding ENL programs to ensure that students are reaching their goals to meet commanding levels of the English Language. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The assessment tools we use to evaluate the success of our programs for ENL students are the New York State ELA exams for students in grades 3-5, the ELL Periodic Assessment, and the NYSESLAT for all grades. We look at this data to determine if students are making progress. The NYS ELA exam demonstrates if our students are making reading and writing progress from the previous year. The ELL Periodic Assessment allows us to monitor the language development of our ENL students. The NYSESLAT determines if students are developing in their proficiency abilities and modalities. We also look at the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment results, such as miscue analysis to ensure students are progressing through reading levels. In order to support the HLA in the school, we will compile the data from the ELE annual assessment and reflect on the needs to develop the Spanish Language abilities of our students in the dual language classrooms. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered, the ENL teachers meet with the AP in charge and disucss the types of interventions that are needed for our ENL students. Though we primarily focus on using the "push-in" model of ENL services, we provide students with a small group "pull-out" session to focus on areas of intervention. ENL students receive small group instruction with the ESL and classroom teacher to address the areas of intense intervention with support strategies. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All ENL students receive tier 1 instruction delivered by the teacher using the evidence based core curriculum Wonders/Maravillas. Students in need of tier 2 interventions will receive instruction in small groups focusing on specific learning needs. Progress monitoring will determine whether students need to continue receiving tier 2 interventions. If students make limited progess on benchmark goals, the frequency and duration of tier 2 intervention will increase with additional strategies and resources available. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Outcome assessment data used at PS 30 includes the new common core aligned NYSESLAT assessment. Based on the data, students receive proficiancy levels and teachers plan according to the necessary skills and standards students need to progess. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Using NYSESLAT data, teachers are able to drive instruction based on individual student needs. Outcome assessment data also comes from the F&P Benchmark Assessments. Looking at miscue analysis and fluency scores, teachers plan lessons to meet the demands of the students. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? To disseminate the findings, teachers meet on a weekly basis to plan and implement to meet the needs of ENL learners. Teachers discuss the effectiveness of literacy development progams and any adjustments or modifications needed to supplement learning. Meetings are also held with administration to share feedback on program successes as well as to ensure that the appropriate resources are purchased for our school to meet the needs of our ENL students. Specifically, we will be purchasing the Wonders/Maravillas literacy program which puts an emphasis on academic vocabulary development. This will allow our students to improve in the areas of reading and writing throughout the academic year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At P.S. 30x the following organizational model is implemented; Push-In (Co-Teaching). In the integrated model, the ESOL teacher provides ENL support through the content areas to enrich language. The students are heterogeneously grouped with mixed proficiency levels in one class on each grade level. A certified ENL teacher goes into the classroom to provide ENL instruction. The classroom teacher and the ENL teacher collaborate and plan lessons to ensure students' needs are being addressed. In addition, small groups are pulled out of the classroom once a week to address any intervention ENL students may need. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. The dual language classes are taught reading, writing, math, social studies, science and phonics in alternating one-week cycles of English and Spanish. At PS30x teachers use the following instructional approaches and methods to make content comprehensible to enrich language development: 1. Differentiated instruction 2. Thematic interdisciplinary instruction 3. There are five levels of instruction a. Level One - Entering b. Level Two - Emerging c. Level Three - Transitioning d. Level Four - Expanding e. Level Five - Commanding They are divided into small groups to receive instruction (Ex. Guided Reading) 4. Music is an excellent vehicle for language learning specifically using songs, vocabulary, sentence structure, rhythm and intonation which can reinforce language development. 5. Integrating the four skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing). 6. Different modeling techniques are used for content area instruction. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the Freestanding program model 360 or 180 ENL instructional minutes per week are delivered by the ESOL teacher. The minutes allotted depend on the student's proficiency level. The allotments are as follows:Entering: 360 min/weekEmerging: 360 min/weekTransitioning: 180min/weekExpanding: 180min/weekThe classroom teacher delivers 180 ELA instructional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  minutes. Therefore, we are ensuring that students are receiving up to 540 min of ENL instruction a week. The Dual Language program model is 50% English and 50% Spanish. Students will receive ENL instructional minutes during the English week and ELA instructional minutes during the Spanish week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The classroom instruction, whether in a dual language or monolingual setting, utilizes the Wonders/Maravillas program for literacy. Differentiated instruction is the key component whether the subject is reading, math, science, social studies or ENL. Throughout the school year, professional development sessions are provided to teachers on effective and research based strategies to use with ELL students. The ENL teacher plans with general education and Dual Language program teachers in order to modify the lessons for all content areas to provide multiple entry points for ELL students. The ENL teacher pushes in a minimun of two times per week for designated classes. Teachers also address the cultural and linguistic needs of our population by providing information on parent engagement days and adult classes during Saturday Academy. The school implements Academic Intervention Services (AIS) and ENL push-in programs to offer additional assistance as required. The Saturday programs offer a language acquisition component to provide additional opportunities for targeted students. The results of the NYSESLAT exams will help determine placement for the subsequent years. If extensions of services are required, providers, classroom teachers, and parents will all be part of developing a program to meet the needs of the students the following year. In both programs teachers utilize many instructional strategies and grade level materials to support their learners. They use print-rich texts, explicit and direct teaching, modeling, repetition, preferential seating, manipulatives, infuse of technology/use of the SMART board, small group instruction, strategy groups and guided reading. In addition for those students who require extra support in literacy (reading/writing), they get a daily dose of Wilson Reading/Fundations Program to support their phonemic awareness. The content areas are delivered in English or Spanish in the Dual Language Programs. PS 30 uses Go Math for their Dual Language classes which comes in Spanish to accommodate our Native Spanish speakers. Social Studies is taught using Passport to Social Studies and NYC Scope & Sequence. This program focuses on using primary sources to teach to the NYS Social Studies standards at the same time addressing CCSS and ENL standards. Science is taught using the FOSS program as well as hands-on science labs and STEM projects. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in Kindergarten, 1st grade and 2nd grade with the Fountas & Pinnell Sistema de evaluación de la lectura (SEL). The ELE Assessments are used to evaluate ELLs in 3rd - 5th in their native language. The Wonders/Maravillas program also offers a reading assessment in Spanish for students in grade 3-5 who have surpassed the F&P level in the Sistema de Evaluacion de la Lectura (level N). 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. The administration and classroom teachers have knowledge when a student has interrupted schooling and based on that premise the teacher will modify instruction to meet the needs of the student. The modifications may include (but limited to); small group instruction, use of visuals and hands on activities. Instructional materials are available to teachers on the instructional level of the student in order to provide appropriate lessons. The ENL teacher works with SIFE students and provides instruction in English to promote literacy skills, letter and sound relationships, phonics and number sense. All SIFE students are grouped together for additional help in our Title III ELL Saturday Academy. Materials are provided on the instructional level of students and instruction is delivered by certified teachers. b. When a student first arrives at school, a plan is in place to determine his/her English proficiency. The process is similar for new monolingual students. Informal assessments are conducted and a review of test history, attendance, grades and other records are reviewed by a member of 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  the LAP team to determine the proper class placement or any special services needed. The parent is given an orientation regarding programs and services that are available in the school. PS 30x offers a full range of parent workshops to assist them in working with their children as well as to help them improve their literacy and math skills. During the first three years in the school, a strong emphasis is placed on building background knowledge, developing fluency, improvement in reading and writing skills in both languages, and a strong ESL component to help the child transition into a monolingual setting. The students receive ongoing assessments in both languages and various tools are used including Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark, teacher-made assessments, unit tests and NYSESLAT. The administration and teachers compile a wealth of data, the analysis of which will determine the strategies to be implemented for the student. c. For Developing ELL students a close examination of data is required. The classroom teachers, along with the ENL teacher will review NYSESLAT scores. This along with close monitoring of the student in the classroom setting will help provide the tools necessary to create a Learning Plan for the student. Ongoing assessments will help determine progress towards identified targets. d. To address Long term ELL students who do not successfully transition to a monolingual setting, conversations are held with the classroom teacher, parents and RtI team. An in depth analysis of data over the years is presented. Suggestions are made for placement and services the school can offer. The plans for students who have not progressed over an extended time are varied. They range from evaluation for students who have difficulties which go beyond low performance, a change of class type to one which will offer opportunities presented in a different way than current structures, a change in the type of AIS services offered, which would include; different materials, different modes of instruction (technology), and/or different service providers. In some cases, the use of outside consultants, mentors, or members of the CBO community will be utilized to break through the barriers. Individualized differentiated instruction plans will be developed for each ELL student. e. Former ELLs continue to receive services and testing accommodations as needed for two years. In addition, former ELLs receive ENL differentiation and services if it is determined that they require additional support to enrich the cognitive academic language. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The teachers of ELL-SWDs use many instructional strategies and grade level materials to support their learners. They use print-rich texts, explicit and direct teaching, modeling, repetition, visual aides/cues, guided interaction, preferential seating, manipulatives, infusion of technology/use of the SMART board or SMART table, small group instruction, strategy groups and guided reading. In addition, for those students who require extra support in literacy (reading/writing), they get a daily dose of Wilson Reading/Fundations to support their phonemic awareness. ELL-SWDs in special class (12:1) are provided with a language para for translation purposes and small group instruction. ELL’s with special needs adhere to the same instructional plans and curriculum guidelines as the ELLs in general education setting, with the exception that instruction is modified and specific strategies are incorporated to meet students’ individual language and academic needs (as mandated by IEP). Students are monitored for academic development, language acquisition and proficiency to determine individual progress. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Special Education teachers are offered the opportunity to attend bilingual professional learning sessions to improve pedagogy and teacher practice. The students at P.S. 30x are placed within the least restrictive environment based on their classification and academic needs and continue to receive ENL support from the provider. Students receive SETTS in the areas in which they can be provided with structured support to meet indivdual needs. SETTS is done using push-in and pull-out models. Classified ELL students sitting in a monolingual special education class are provided with an alternative placement para to provide language translation support. This flexible scheduling has proved to be successful within our building. Our goal is to ultimately meet the needs of our learners so they can all acquire the skills necessary to succeed. In order for this programming to work within our building, all classroom teachers in grades K-2 are implementing literacy at the same time, as well as the classroom teachers in grades 3-5. This is inclusive of the self-contained and bilingual classes.The following services are available for special needs ELL’s who are classified as learning disabled or speech impaired: • Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) up to 8 students with one special education teacher.)• Bilingual Speech and Language Therapy (Services can be provided at the students’ language proficiency levels)• Speech and Language Therapy (Services can be provided at the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  students’ language proficiency levels)• ESL Push-In Service• ELL Saturday Academy 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs have been designed to strategically increase the reading proficiency of ELLs based on their individualized needs. One subgroup are the Newcomers. The interventions offered for Newcomers includes a focus on listening and speaking skills using World of Words (WOW), visual aides, iRead and Myon. Students are also invited to attend Title III ELL Academy programs within the school on Saturdays as well as in summer. Students receive assistance from ENL teachers and coaches. The ELLs-SWD subgroup are offered intervention with an emphasis on individualized education goals for each student. For ELA instruction, ELL-SWD are offered the opportunity to have small guided instruction in both English and Spanish, visual aides, vocabulary cards, iRead, Myon and Flocabulary. Math instruction is provided with visual aides, GO Math Think Central, intervention skill sets, manipulatives and Focused Mathematics Instruction. Science and Social Studies core content is presented with technology, visual aides, hands-on experiments and resources in both English and the Native Language. Former-ELLs are provided with any and all of the supports offered to other subgroups. Students will receive instruction in English and Native Language using ESL strategies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are implementing the Wonders/Maravillas program to enhance HL instruction. The program consists of reading, writing, phonics, and vocabulary development in English and Spanish. This is targeted for the Dual Language programs to enrich HL and NL skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs are being discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. PS 30 has a myriad of programs. All programs, such as Title III Saturday Academy, ExpandEd (2nd grade), and Road to Success are available to all students. New Victory Theater works with students to enhance language development. The school offers an extended day which offers remedial and enrichment instruction to all students from all classes. Title III has provided opportunities specifically for the ELL population. All ELL students are invited to attend a Title III after school program on Saturdays. Students are grouped by their proficiency level to ensure their needs are being met. Students are also offered Title III summer school program opportunities. PS 30 also offers an array of extracurricular activities after school to support language and social development, such as dance, violin, drama, glee club, photography club, basketball and art club. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The teachers of ELL-SWD use many instructional strategies and grade level materials to support their learners. They use print-rich texts, explicit and direct teaching, modeling, repetition, preferential seating, manipulatives, infusion of technology/use of the SMART board, small group instruction, strategy groups and guided reading. In addition for those students who require extra support in literacy receive 1-2 sessions of Fundations to support their phonemic awareness. Activities for improving instruction and student performance in English Language Arts include the implementation of balanced literacy using a 120 minute literacy block schedule. Classroom libraries provide books in English and Native Languages that are on the instructional and independent reading level of students. Teachers conduct ongoing observations, conferences, running records, and assessments to monitor student progress. One goal is for students to move from teacher directed activities to more independent activities with support from the teacher. Literary and informational classroom 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  libraries, Time for Kids Grammar, Fundations and Words Their Way are used in classrooms to support spelling, phonics, decoding, vocabulary and word study. Independent reading and writing, Shared Reading and Writing, Interactive Writing, Read Aloud, Word Study and Guided Reading are used daily by teachers to provide a balanced approach to reading and writing. Teachers use the ATS Reports, Acuity Predictive and Instructionally Target Assessment (ITA), Fountas and Pinnell reading benchmarks and other data to evaluate students and plan instruction. Students engage in science labs, completing hands on experiments and projects. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language is used to support the English language acquisition. Home Language materials are provided in leveled libraries in dual language and ENL classrooms. Reference books and dictionaries are also provided in the home language. When tested in the content areas, ENL students are provided with tests in the home language and translation dictionaries. The home language is used in all curriculum areas and is based on the student’s NYSESLAT level. The home language is used to assist students’ understanding in the classroom. It is used between students when they are in peer tutoring or buddy groups. The teachers use the language to check for comprehension, explain activities and provide instruction during the day. Instructional materials, library books and communications are available in English and the Home Language. All DL and ENL students are provided with English and HL instructional support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. PS 30 ensures all required services and resources for ENL students corresond to the students age and grade level by assessing students and providing services for their current need. Service providers are required to obtain signatures from the classroom teacher to document the proper service and time is provided. Teachers and ENL providers also have time to plan and implement strategies to ensure student success. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The American Dream School is colocated within PS 30. ENL teachers are provided opportunites to collaborate with ENL providers of the American Dream School to share best practices and various strategies to promote success. Many students graduate 5th grade and have moved on to the American Dream School, focused on bilingal education. Through the efforts of a joint grant between the schools, we also implemented Curiosity Machine, a science program geared toward developing academic vocabulary necessary to master the English language. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students are invited to attend the Title III summer enrichment program and Saturday Academy, The program includes classroom activities around themes which utilize community trips in helping develop language skills, as well as assisting the students to become acquainted with their neighborhood and local resources. Mr. D. Berdugo, ENL Coordinator, is responsible for ensuring the program receives the materials necessary for success. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives in our elementary school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  Dual Language classrooms are self-contained for speakers of Spanish and English. Students of two different language groups are purposely mixed in the same educational environment to provide communicative and academic language development through an interactive and cross-cultural setting. Program participation begins in kindergarten. Upon entry into the dual language program, the student’s primary language is determined. The program is conducted in both languages, interchanging weekly. Weeks are alternated with English and Spanish instruction. The philosophy/goal of the Dual Language Instructional program is to provide quality content area instruction, develop student’s academic language skills in their primary language, and accelerate the development of the English language for students identified as English language learners.Our Literacy model is both comprehensive and detailed with a number of activities that take into account the academic and linguistic developmental growth of children developing their first language and adding a second language. The model’s philosophy is that children can indeed learn subject matter effectively in either their L1 or L2, given the use of appropriate instructional strategies and activities that support the L2 learner. An emphasis in the program is to keep academic work at grade level in both languages at all times. As part of our Spanish Literacy Reading curriculum, we are implementing the Maravillas literacy program, which is an accelerated, systematic, and explicit phonics program that provides children with the phonics tools necessary to decode beginning reading materials in Spanish. This developmentally appropriate program provides an individualized approach whereby students’ progress at their own pace. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for all ENL personnel at PS 30x includes but is not limited to support from the Literacy Coach, Dual Language/ENL Coach and other service providers outside the school building. Teachers of ENL students are provided with ongoing bilingual education professional learning opportunities to support the Common Core Learning Standards. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL coordinator along with the guidance counselor collaborate with the planning and preparation of transition from elementary to middle school. Teacher training is provided by Wonders/Maravillas consultants, Literacy Coach/UFT Teacher Center, and ENL coordinator who work with teachers in strengthening their skills and develop strategies to improve reading and writing proficiency using the workshop model. Our literacy coaches work with classroom teachers everyday to improve the quality of their teaching and focus on new strategies to help struggling readers and at risk students. The ESL teacher along with the guidance counselor collaborate with the planning and preparing of instruction to attain student’s goals and objectives in order to transition students from elementary to middle school. New teachers receive 15% of total PD hours (17.5% of total PD hours for Spec. Ed. Teachers). The training may include any and all of the following; DOE training, outside consultants, network providers. The workshops will include language methodology for teaching ELL’s, acquisition theory, and NYSESLAT preparation strategy. Teachers complete a form indicating the professional development they received and what they learned from their training. These records are given to the Payroll Secretary who then files them in the teacher's records. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Starting in the 2017-2018 academic year, Mr. Berdugo will hold a monthly meeting starting in October to discuss the goals of the Dual Language and ENL programs. During this meeting, all relevant assessment data will be discussed as well as providing strategies for parents to help their children at home. Also, parents will be given a calendar of projects that students will be engaged in during the content areas and will be provided with the vocabulary to be learned for each unit. Since Mr. Berdugo is fluent in Spanish, he will translate the meeting. For languages other than English and Spanish, an interpreter will be requested through the Office of English Language Learners. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Starting in the 2017-2018 academic year, Mr. Berdugo will hold a monthly meeting starting in October to discuss the goals of the Dual Language and ENL programs. During this meeting, all relevant assessment data will be discussed as well as providing strategies for parents to help their children at home. Also, parents will be given a calendar of projects that students will be engaged in during the content areas and will be provided with the vocabulary to be learned for each unit. Since Mr. Berdugo is fluent in Spanish, he will translate the meeting. For languages other than English and Spanish, an interpreter will be requested through the Office of English Language Learners. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Debra Michaux, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 30X: Wilton School DBN: 07X030 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Debra Michaux Title Principal Maria Martinez Assistant Principal Ana Vasquez Parent Coordinator Daniel Berdugo ENL/Bilingual Teacher Susana Flores Parent Evelyn Gomez Teacher/Subject Area n/a Rosa Veras n/a Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Angela Stamps School Counselor Elisa Alvarez Olga Mejia-Glenn Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Bronx Gadyra Lopez Other Related Services n/a n/a Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 n/a 06/06/17 n/a 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 06/06/17 n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: PS 30X: Wilton Superintendent: E. Alvarez DBN: 07X030 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Ana Vazquez Daniel (*Primary) Berdugo Parent Coordinator ENL Coordinator NO No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use information from the HLIS, information from ATS, and parent conversations during face-to-face meetings to assess which language preferences are parents are requesting to be communicated with. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Arabic French Chinese (Mandarin) Ndebele Araucanian 178 1 2 4 1 0 35.04% 0.2% 0.39% 0.79% 0.2% 0 179 1 2 4 1 1 35.24% 0.2% 0.39% 0.79% 0.2% 0.2% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Calendar monthly School Newsletters monthly New York State Testing Dates April 2019-June 2019 Upcoming Events TBD After School Program Information TBD Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator Complete translation of calendar 1 month in advance teachers translates 1 month in advance Testing Coordinator ensures translation prior to testing period Parent Coordinator translates fliers prior to events Invitation is translated prior to the start of program 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent Teacher Conferences Tuesday Parent Engagement Days School Nights Parent Workshops Extra-Curricular School Events Parent Outreach via Telephone plan to provide interpretation service(s)? When possible, we utilize in-house staff to interpret for the parent. However, for parents that require a preferred language not covered by the school staff, when appropriate we use an over-the-phone interpreter via Language Line or hire a DOE vendor to send an on-site interpreter. September October November December January February March April May June 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school has translators to reach Spanish speaking families. The school would reach those families via phone to insure dissemination of information is given in a timely manner. For those families whose language is other than English or Spanish, we would employ the use of the over-the-phone Language Line.. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  During Welcome back PD in September Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) PS 30X downloads all relevant translated forms and provide them to parents during face-to-face meetings, through the mail, or sending them home with the students. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? PS 30X will conduct a survey with the help of the parent coordinator at the end of each academic year to assess if we need to modify our translation services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87 
