2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X031 School Name: P.S./M.S. 031 THE WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON Principal: WILLIAM HEWLETT 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: William Lloyd Garrison 320700010031 Pre-K-8 School Number (DBN): 07X031 250 East 156 th Street, Bronx, NY 10451 718-292-4397 718-292-4399 Phone Number: Fax: William Hewlett, Jr. whewlet@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: William Hewlett, Jr. John Hailey Wanda DeLeon William Hewlett Miriam Domenech Savitrie Moses N/A N/A N/A District Information Mr. R. Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue Bronx, New York RAlvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 Phone Number: 718-742-6548 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/(718) 741-8895 (718) 828-6280 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) William Hewlett, Jr. John Hailey Wanda DeLeon XiomaraSerrano Miriam Domenech SavitrieMoses N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Name Eileen Rexer-Horowitz Stephanie Everett Miviam Torres-Colon Claire Evans Irene Watson Diana Melendez DaniellePoole Natalie Ortiz Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At PS/MS 31, our mission is to ensure that all children can and will learn. We will maintain high expectations and promote academic excellence for all students. We will create and support a school environment in which all children and adults feel welcomed, respected and trusted. That has an environment where we can learn together and support each other. An environment that requires students and adults to challenge themselves regularly and challenge each other respectfully. We will foster a positive school climate of a caring community which respects and values diversity and nurtures everyone’s self-esteem. Our community of learners will be college and career ready due to our constant push to provide rigorous, critical thinking and decision making opportunities. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS/MS 31 is located in the Mott Haven section of the South Bronx, a few blocks away from the County Courthouse and Yankee Stadium. PS/MS 31 a Pre-K- Grade 8 School that serves a population of approximately 735 students from culturally diverse backgrounds. According to recent data, 70.1% of the population is Hispanic, 25.8% Black, 2% Asian and 2% other. PS/MS 31 is a PBIS, Positive Behavior Intervention School. Students that demonstrate positive and appropriate behaviors receive rewards on different levels based on academic and behavioral achievement. Students use their rewards to choose from a menu of tangible activities such as lunch with teachers or administrators of their choice, celebrations, or auctions for purchasing items of interest. PS/MS 31 offers after-school programs such ASPIRA for grades Kindergarten- 8 th Grade, and Urban Dove for Grades 3-5. Students engage in interest clubs, including animation, drama, film and mock trials. Through our school's securing of the School Improvement Grant (SIG) we have partnered with the Center for Educational Innovation, Literacy Support Systems, Goldmansour Rutherford, Omnilearn, National Training Network, Shane Purse, Datacorp, UFT Teachers Center and Apple Inc. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Approximately 21.2% of the population is special needs. PS/MS 31 offers students with special needs, the full continuum of services including special education teacher supports, collaborative teaching, instruction in self-contained classes, and related services such as Speech and Language, Counseling and Occupational and Physical Therapy. In addition, 17% of PS/MS 31’s populations are English Language Learners with Spanish as the predominant language, and a growing number of Arabic and French speaking students. At PS/MS 31, there is an ESL pull-out program for grades K-8. Our teachers provide small group academic intervention services for students identified by their scores on the Common Core New York State Test. Our ELL population has academic needs that include language acquisition as well as writing and comprehending on grade level. The social emotional needs includes that of assimilation to a new environment and culture that we address through our Single Shepherds counselors. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  In the area of Rigorous Instruction and Effective School Leadership our school’s strengths include the purchase of I-Ready and EngradePro to support the utilization and disaggregation of data in order to support data-driven planning and instruction. The school provides opportunities for teacher teams to work collaboratively to evaluate, develop, and improve instruction, resulting in the sharing of best practices which will directly impact student achievement. Consultants from Literacy and Matters support this work. Under Collaborative Teachers PS/MS 31 will continue to improve the collaboration between the staff and the consultants in order to further design and develop professional learning opportunities that will result in teams examining student data to plan for cognitively engaging tasks that will lead to critical thinking and higher order skill development. In the area of supportive environment, PS/MS 31 will improve student voice by encouraging students to become part of the decision making process. Students will be empowered to improve school community concerns such as students not feeling that they treat each other with respect, and the school offering enough variety of programs to keep them interested in school. In the area of Strong Family-Community ties PS/MS 31 will work to continue our growth of parent participation through the use of our social media tools in particular Class DOJO where we seek 75% parent engagement. 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X031 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 708 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 74 73 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 46 39 26 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 89.5% % Reduced Lunch 14.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 66.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 19.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 65% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 65 67 90.5% 1.3% 24.6% 27.4% 2.8% 0.8% 4 17% 9.2 17.8% 14% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  2018-19 SCEP-P 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School strengths:  Across grade bands teachers worked collaboratively to evaluate, develop and improve curriculum maps and units aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. The Staff Developer, the Literacy and the Math Consultants collaborated with staff in designing and developing literacy, math, social studies and science professional development opportunities which promotes best practices in assessing, teaching and learning.  The school has formed Professional Learning Community teams who work with the consultants and staff developer to examine student data and plan.  Developed a framework for collaborative teams and inquiry teams across grades and content areas to plan, strategize, and share best practices to improve teaching and learning .  Teacher teams meet weekly to analyze student data and using a stated protocol look at trends and analyze student needs. School needs: As noted in the 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review: 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  1.1, 1.2, 2.2, 4.1 Although the school experienced a an overall 2.7% growth in our ELA score to 19.6% of students performing at grade level over 75% of our ELL students and 64% of our SWD students are still performing at Level 1. Both these subgroups have had double-digit decreases from one year to the next as we have had intensive focus on these students through careful data examination this group still merits our attention. In the area of mathematics once again through careful and constant examination of data through our teams meeting and planning and the use of station teaching PS/MS 31 experienced a nearly 8% growth in the number of students performing on grade level as we are at 17.8%. Our movement of students out of level one was the fourth highest in all of the Bronx. During all professional learning opportunities as well as conversations with staff, be sure to stress the connection between strong formative assessment practices and teacher growth in planning, questioning and discussion, student engagement, and student ownership of their learning. Be especially mindful to point out to teachers how making the assessment criteria clear to students multiple times throughout the lesson helps to create student ownership of their own learning. When you visit classrooms, be sure to ask teachers how they are tracking student understanding of the assessment criteria and when/how they will modify their instruction in the moment based on student work and/or conversations. Create opportunities for teachers from across grades to visit classrooms of teachers who are experienced in using a variety of questioning strategies to create genuine student led discussions among all students. Work with your assistant principals and your consultants to begin to identify those common instructional strategies for 3b, 3c, and 3d aligned to the school’s belief about teaching and learning. Create an “instructional guide” that contains these practices with a brief explanation of each strategy, when teachers should/could use it during a lesson, and why. Challenge teacher teams to regularly review this document at designated benchmark dates aligned to your inquiry cycles so that new practices can be added as they surface. 4.1 - Moving forward, create a plan that allows all administrators to begin observations at the start of the school year. Be sure that this schedule includes time for all of you to write as well as time to observe classrooms together to norm your practice. Once you have finalized your schedule be sure to review school support staff schedules to ensure alignment. Written observation reports, as well as feedback provided during coaching opportunities, should be regularly reviewed during cabinet meetings to ensure alignment to the Danielson Framework for Teaching, actionable next steps, and references to common school-wide instructional practices once they are created by department teams. As you develop a robust school-wide inter-visitation schedule, consider accompanying teacher leaders and consultants on these non-evaluative classrooms visits to help support a culture where all staff members prioritize their own learning and take ownership for consistently working collaboratively to improve the alignment between planning, delivering, and reflecting on their own pedagogy. Work with your assistant principals to develop a system to consistently follow up on feedback to teacher work products and to ensure that peer feedback is aligned to administrators ratings in domain 1. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-P 16 By June 2019 5% of the subgroup ENL students in grades 4 and 7 will move up one proficiency level as evidenced from the 2019 NYS ELA examination. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Grades K-2 assessments: 1. Running records K- 2 Students 2. Dolch Words 3. Writing- on-demand 2 times for each instructional period (to measure student's development of writing) 4. I-ready ELA diagnostic (instructional periods , 3, and 5 to determine grade level and measure growth) 5. Fundations 6. Go-Math chapter assessments 7. Fountas and Pinnell Grades 3-5 assessments: Students in Grades 3-5 1. Running records (lowest 1/3 for the 5th grade) 2. Writing-on-Demand 2 times for each instructional period 3. grades 3-4 : Words Their Way for instructional periods 1, 3, and 5 (to measure vocabulary growth) Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Sept 2018 to June 2019 Sept 2018 to June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  4. Performance Series Reading Assessment 5. Performance Series Math Assessments 6. ELL Periodic Assessment for instructional periods 2 and 4 Students in Grades 6-8 Sept 2018 to June 2019 Grades 6-8 assessments: 1. Performance Series Reading Assessments 2. Performance Series Math Assessments for instructional periods 1, and 5 3. Writing-on-Demand 3 times per instructional period 4. Triumph Learning Math Assessments for each of the 4 math domains (ratios and proportional relationships, number sense, expressions and equations, statistics and probability) 5. Math reasoning Inventory Written Assessment Questions 6. ELL Periodic Assessments for instructional periods 2 and 4 SCHEDULING AND STUDENT ASSIGNMENTS All ENL teachers The grade band of the ENL teachers (K-2, 3-5 and 6-8) will be disbanded and each teacher will have students from each grade band and participate in team meetings and collaborate with teachers from each band. Sept 2018 to June 2019 All teachers, consultants, Borough instructional specialist. Inquiry Groups and professional learning time: All ENL Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers subgroup students in Grades 4 and 7 Para-Professionals Service Providers Borough Support Office Teachers in Grades 4 and 7 through content area and CTLE meetings will have opportunities to collaborate, share student data, share teaching strategies and develop action plans for planning and teaching with the service providers that include those awarded from school SIG Grant in various content areas, the ESL teachers, the special education teachers, and the Para-professionals. The ELA and Math consultants will be part of this discourse. The staff will also be able to participate in specific group discussions using 2018-19 SCEP-P 19 Sept 2018-June 2019 ENL instructional support specialist from Borough Field Office, Staff developer ELA and Math Consultants School Leaders Teachers, administrators, consultants Sept 2018-June 2019 teaching videos from Edivation or view self- selected videos from Edivation for individual pedagogical development. The teachers will be able to conduct inter-class visitations and peer-room evaluations and feedback as participants of a professional learning community. Curriculum and Lesson Planning All ENL Teachers in Grades 4 and 7 will be given additional time after school to plan curriculum and lessons. School Leaders will consistently review teacher usage of the Edivation on-line series for professional development to further promote discourse with teachers about effective and rigorous lesson planning and teaching for all learners. students in Grades 4 and 7 Grades K-2 assessments: Students 1. Running records 2. Dolch Words 3. Writing- on-demand 2 times for each instructional period (to measure student's development of writing) 4. I-ready ELA diagnostic (instructional periods , 3, and 5 to determine grade level and measure growth) 5. Fundations 6. Go-Math chapter assessments 7. Fountas and Pinnell Grades 3-5 assessments: 1. Running records (lowest 1/3 for the 5th grade) 2. Writing-on-Demand 2 times for each instructional period 3. grades 3-4 : Words Their Way for instructional periods 1, 3, and 5 (to measure vocabulary growth) 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  4. Performance Series Reading Assessment 5. Performance Series Math Assessments 6. ELL Periodic Assessment for instructional periods 2 and 4 Grades 6-8 assessments: 1. Performance Series Reading Assessments 2. Performance Series Math Assessments for instructional periods 1, and 5 3. Writing-on-Demand 3 times per instructional period 4. Triumph Learning Math Assessments for each of the 4 math domains (ratios and proportional relationships, number sense, expressions and equations, statistics and probability) 5. Math reasoning Inventory Written Assessment Questions 6. ELL Periodic Assessments for instructional periods 2 and 4 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through the utilization of the Parent Coordinator, Deans and administrators a back to school night held in September 2018 the work we are detailing in the classroom will be described and presented to parents. These presentations will be ongoing and facilitate the school goal. Parents will be continually updated on student progress through their utilization of Engrade and kept up to date on school news via Class DOJO. Details on instructional progress will also be discussed during meetings with teachers and administrators during Parent Engagement and specific parent progress meetings such as Promotion-in-Doubt meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. I-Ready program:  I-Ready license fee  Ready materials 2018-19 SCEP-P 21   Analyze data – 20 teachers x 1 hour x 10 sessions LEAP Program: ● Materials and supplies Curriculum and Lesson Planning:  ELA and Math consultants 7 additional days for each consultant 20 teachers X 2 hours X 10 sessions. School SIG Grant Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 PS/MS 31 Teacher Teams in grades 4 and 7 will collaboratively look at interim assessment data and student work products of the identified population to monitor progress as measured by a 2% growth on ELA interim assessment data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IReady and ELA performance series baseline reports that will be utilized to assess progress will be those provided by DataCorp. Teachers will enter the results of all assessments into their Dropbox accounts and analyze student and class trends. The other instrument to measure progress toward this goal will be teacher ratings in Advance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? School strengths:  The establishment and use of our Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) to further develop and sustain a positive social and emotional learning environment for the students and the school community. This framework created a school-wide incentive system (Black Cards) for appropriate and positive behaviors that students demonstrate throughout the school day. This system fosters the celebrations of student successes, acceptable behaviors, and student accomplishments with school- wide rewards and recognitions. This is evidenced by our score of 3.5 from our inclusion score from the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide.  The school’s Psychologist, Guidance Counselor, Single Shepherd counselors, and Deans have an integral role with PBIS by supporting and promoting the school’s vision for the social and emotional developmental health of the students with a net result of a healthier environment for families, teachers, and students. This team facilitates peer meditations, peer school community services assignments, and collaborates with teachers, parents, and students, social and academic action plans that support student achievement. School needs/Priorities: 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  On the school quality guide we received a score of 2.3 on students with 90% or above attendance. Consistent monitoring by all staff members of the school DOJO incentive system to ensure that teachers and administrators are providing appropriate feedback in the form of electronic entries. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Through the use of our supportive environment intervention specialists, by June 2019 identified chronic absentee students will show a 5% attendance increase as measured by student attendance reports. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Chronic absentee students identified by attendance team and a history and previous history of interventions will be reviewed and next steps to prevent their return to this list will be addressed. chronic absentee students. Inclusion of this group to insure their participation in all school attendance promotional activities. Such as receiving a "Swag" jacket in the middle school, recognition on school DOJO, a school Black Card and invitations to events such as "Popcorn and a movie" All identified chronic absentee students Sept 2018 to June 2019 Sept 2018-June 2019 Daily Progress monitoring of this subgroup by members of the attendance team. If these students reach eight absences by the middle of February ACS will be contacted to intervene. Parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Insure support services for SWD and ELL students through student intervention specialists, outside intervention agencies and Borough support provided to support student attendance. Sept 2018 to June 2019 Students Parents of chronic absentee students Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, Deans and Administrators, attendance and guidance personnel. Teachers, administration, Deans and students and guidance personnel and school CBO Parent Coordinator, Deans and Teachers and guidance personnel Guidance personnel, intervention agencies and borough support. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will partner in this endeavor. The school will communicate via home visits, phone outreach, school DOJO, etc. The school will partner with child protective agencies to constantly monitor student attendance and become involved via student incentives to increase student attendance. Our attendance team that consists of our family worker, borough attendance teacher, AP, guidance counselor on the elementary level and single shepherd counselors on the middle school level will provide individual attendance support to our students and families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Use of technology based programs such as DOJO, use of school smartboards and laptops/IPAD's by staff, recognition of students during school assemblies. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 PS/MS 31 will show a 3% decrease in chronic absenteeism from identified students in all grades through the examination of attendance reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS student attendance reports and attendance reports from CAAS scanning system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School strengths: Teachers participate in structured professional learning opportunities and the inquiry process to learn and reflect about best practices for instructional strategies to explicitly teach the common core learning standards, how to unpack the common core standards, infuse lesson adaptations for students to have multiple entry points, and how to assess, monitor and track student progress. The teachers are active participants in reviewing the school data from the school quality report to assist with their lesson planning and meeting students’ needs. The teachers have been trained how to effectively use an ELA and Math diagnostic system which includes in-depth diagnostic assessments, progress monitoring assessments, lessons targeted to meet students’ specific needs, and classroom instructional resources derived from the diagnostic. Through the use of data received from IReady reports, June Instructional reports and those received in Dropbox we are able to identify a standard of need and focus intervention on that area. School needs: From 2017 - 2018 PPO 1.1, 1.2, 2.2 During all professional learning opportunities as well as conversations with staff, be sure to stress the connection between strong formative assessment practices and teacher growth in planning, questioning and discussion, student 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  engagement, and student ownership of their learning. Be especially mindful to point out to teachers how making the assessment criteria clear to students multiple times throughout the lesson helps to create student ownership of their own learning. When you visit classrooms, be sure to ask teachers how they are tracking student understanding of the assessment criteria and when/how they will modify their instruction in the moment based on student work and/or conversations. Create opportunities for teachers from across grades to visit classrooms of teachers who are experienced in using a variety of questioning strategies to create genuine student led discussions among all students. Work with your assistant principals and your consultants to begin to identify those common instructional strategies for 3b, 3c, and 3d aligned to the school’s belief about teaching and learning. Create an “instructional guide” that contains these practices with a brief explanation of each strategy, when teachers should/could use it during a lesson, and why. Challenge teacher teams to regularly review this document at designated benchmark dates aligned to your inquiry cycles so that new practices can be added as they surface. With 77% of our ELL's still performing at a Level 1 the need is still there for greater collaboration and accountability by the general ed and ELL teacher to move our students out of Level 1, 4.1 Moving forward, create a plan that allows all administrators to begin observations at the start of the school year. Be sure that this schedule includes time for all of you to write as well as time to observe classrooms together to norm your practice. Once you have finalized your schedule be sure to review school support staff schedules to ensure alignment. Written observation reports, as well as feedback provided during coaching opportunities, should be regularly reviewed during cabinet meetings to ensure alignment to the Danielson Framework for Teaching, actionable next steps, and references to common school-wide instructional practices once they are created by department teams. As you develop a robust school-wide inter-visitation schedule, consider accompanying teacher leaders and consultants on these non-evaluative classrooms visits to help support a culture where all staff members prioritize their own learning and take ownership for consistently working collaboratively to improve the alignment between planning, delivering, and reflecting on their own pedagogy. Work with your assistant principals to develop a system to consistently follow up on feedback to teacher work products and to ensure that peer feedback is aligned to administrators ratings in domain 1. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 teacher teams will collaboratively disaggregate student data to differentiate lessons in order to address students needs and create and adjust instructional units which will result in a 5% increase in the number of students performing at or above Level 3 in grades 6-8 on the NYS Mathematics examination. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Common Planning & Inquiry Sessions : During professional learning time and common planning periods that take place weekly the inquiry team will analyze math tasks, using the Datawise protocol, group students based on the results and share strategies such as station teaching that will support and enrich each group of students. Professional Learning Conversations: The team will have the opportunity to meet after school monthly to extend their professional conversations with colleagues across the grade band and also with the special education and the ESL teachers. Based on individual and group data, teachers will make adaptations to the lessons, develop instructional interventions and further develop their teaching practices that will promote higher performance levels on end-line tasks. PS/MS 31 After School Programs: The After-School Program will focus on supporting students based on needs identified by the team. The students will participate in small group tutoring in mathematics for grades 6-8 for after school and Saturday's. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops to explain the benefits of the after school program and how to support their child’s learning experiences at home. EngradePro : Teachers will upload data to the on-line grading program utilizing the enhanced features such as standards tracking, interactive on-line quizzes and Wikis (online pages with embedded links and videos), and flashcards. This will foster transparency with the stakeholders of the teachers' commitment to the success and improvement of their classrooms and the school. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Coaches/Consultants School Leaders Coaches/Consultants School Leaders September 2018 – June 2019 Weekly meetings September 2018- June 2019 Grade 6-8 Teachers Grade 6-8 Teachers, ESL Teachers, Special Education Teachers Identified "pushable" Oct. 2018-May 2019 Teachers students who are within range of performing at Level 3 Students Grades 6-8 Staff Developer Parent Coordinator School leaders September 2018- June 2019 Teachers School Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will engage families through events such as Back to School night and weekly Parent Engagement meetings and workshops facilitated by Parent Coordinator in consultation with the math teachers and team to promote how parents can support their children at home and how collaborative teachers are working toward mathematic proficiency for students in grades 6-8. Parents will also be exposed to an exemplary math classroom and strategies that teachers use for data analysis. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning Conversations  8 teachers X 1 hour X 6 sessions PS/MS 31 After School Programs  After school for grades 3 -5 : 6 teachers X 77 hours and 1 supervisor X 77 hours  Payroll Secretary: 1x__ Engradepro 20 teachers X 4 hours X 5 months Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019 though the examination of interim and formative assessment data of identified students there will be a 2.5% increase in students performing at Grade Level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IReady mathematics assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. X X X 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. From 2017 - 2018 Principal Performance Observation: School strengths:     School Leaders meet daily to reflect and discuss the results of the school systems and their effectiveness on the school-wide practices in the critical areas to continually revise systems to address the school needs. School Leaders articulate a clear rationale for the strategic allocation of resources to support the needs of all teachers and students within the learning community. School Leaders make adjustments to staff schedules to support the school’s instructional goals School Leaders provide targeted feedback to teachers, including strengths and challenges and next steps to support teacher development. The provision of clear expectations in the form of precise feedback. School needs: ● Moving forward, create a plan that allows all administrators to begin observations at the start of the school year. Be sure that this schedule includes time for all of you to write as well as time to observe classrooms together to norm your practice. Once you have finalized your schedule be sure to review school support staff schedules to ensure 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  alignment. Written observation reports, as well as feedback provided during coaching opportunities, should be regularly reviewed during cabinet meetings to ensure alignment to the Danielson Framework for Teaching, actionable next steps, and references to common school-wide instructional practices once they are created by department teams. As you develop a robust school-wide inter-visitation schedule, consider accompanying teacher leaders and consultants on these non-evaluative classrooms visits to help support a culture where all staff members prioritize their own learning and take ownership for consistently working collaboratively to improve the alignment between planning, delivering, and reflecting on their own pedagogy. Work with your assistant principals to develop a system to consistently follow up on feedback to teacher work products and to ensure that peer feedback is aligned to administrators ratings in domain 1. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 all school leaders will have provided timely observational feedback to 100% of eligible teachers that will include next steps and references to common-wide school instructional practices as evidence by Advance reports. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher Data Talks School Leaders will meet with teachers individually to discuss the impact on student learning as part of observational feedback. TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION OF SCHOOL OBSERVERS School Leaders will receive annual training by District Advance Lead and norm observational findings and feedback that will lead to advance observational certification. Action Plans for TIP Teachers. This includes continuous data conferences with TIP Teachers and individualized support for them provided by in-house and outside coaches. All teachers, coaches and administration Sept 2018-June 2019 School Leaders Teachers School Administrators Sept 2018- June 2019 School Leaders District Advance Lead TIP Teachers in all Grades Sept 2018 - June 2019 School Leaders Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As a model for this goal teachers will provide constant verbal and written feedback to students. Parents will be invited to back to school night and parent engagement activities to join in conversations around student progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  2 teachers X 2 hours X 4 sessions and 2 supervisors X 2 hours X 4 sessions  Supplies and Materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 school leaders will have completed 45% of their observations per Superintendent's expectation and provide evidence of written feedback to teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School leaders will use the Advance observational ratings and IReady assessment data to gauge the success of Professional Development initiatives. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School strengths: The establishment and consistency of engaging in reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders to promote dialogue centered on student learning and success: School web site  Monthly parent calendar   EngradePro (on-line communications and grade book)  Phone Master (auto message delivery)   Parent Workshops and family access to cultural events (Urban Advantage Middle School Science Initiative) School flyers and letters facilitated by the Parent Coordinator The school operates using an “Open Door” philosophy. Parents are welcome to visit the school and/or speak with school leaders without an appointment. Every parent in grades 3-8 has a parent account for EngradePro. This gives the parent 24 hour access to their child’s current graded assignments, a list of missing assignments, and the ability to email the teachers. The guidance counselor offers high school application and middle school application clinics for students as well as for the parents. The school encourages parent involvement for student presentations, student awards ceremonies 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  and various school events. Parents also have access to student data reports from I-Ready, the on-line diagnostic program. School Leaders work closely with the CBO partner (ASPIRA) to further augment student learning. School needs: The school need is to increase communication with parents in regards to monitoring student progress and communicating the needs of students to parents. Teachers, parent coordinators, administrators and counselors presently make phone calls, home visits and arrange meetings. With our present database of phone numbers our success rate of parental contact is no higher than 60%. Our school needs to utilize our social media capability to increase and enhance our level and quality of communication. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 5% increase in parent usage of the school's communicative portals such as DOJO and Endgrade as evidence by data collected from parent usage reports. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Workshops: Organize parent workshops for EngradePro usage and I-Ready parent reports usage concurrently with student school dances/events Parents of students in Grades Pre K- 8 Sept 2018 – June 2019 School Leaders and Parent Coordinator and teachers In collaboration with the CBO, the school will host a family resource fair as a community out-reach to provide support and communication with the school community and family community as one unit working together for the benefit of the children. The school will host a parent event with the CBO to show case student talents and accomplishments as well as providing an open forum for parents to voice how the school can better meet their needs. PARENT WORKSHOPS FOR ELL AND SWD PARENTS: Workshops to be conducted for subgroup population parents of ELL and SWD students focusing on specific needs of this subgroups such as changes to IEP's and testing modifications as well as language acquisition services for parents and students. Parents of ELL and SWD students Sept 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator School Administration 3k-8 EngradePro Enhancements: Grades 1 - 8 Sept 2016– School Leaders Update EngradePro system with parent information to commence parent alerts for missed student work Jun 2017 Increase teacher usage of the email system to parents as form of disseminating class information Increase teacher usage of the WIKI space to share information about homework assignments and upcoming class tasks 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Offer incentives for EngradePro weekly parent usage. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Aspira Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. EngradePro Enhancements 24 teachers X 3 hours X 5 sessions Parent Workshops 6 teachers X 4 hours X 2 sessions and 2 Supervisors X 4 hours X 2 sessions Supplies and materials Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 the PS/MS 31 Parent Coordinator will create a schedule and hold no less than 5 family workshops, seminars and activities that support the academic and social-emotional needs of students in all grades as measured by Parent Coordinator monthly report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monitoring parent attendance at monthly meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 identified subgroup students that include ENL students, SWD's and students who are "pushable's" will participate in the ELT programs such as after school ELA and math classes. There will also be Saturday classes for our ELL students and Saturday test prep programs in ELA and Math that will lead to a 3% growth in their proficiency level in ELA and mathematics. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Participation will be actively encouraged to emphasize the importance of academic success of students through academic intervention that can take place after school and Saturday's. Also the importance of receiving these services that can help with promotion decisions. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. PS/MS 31 provides academic after school and Saturday programs through the use of Myon, I-Exel and IReady programs. We also utilize our after-school STEAM program that integrates the arts and science through hands-on academic enrichment programs. All teachers are certified in their content area. Our CBO Aspira partners with PS/MS 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  31 to provide and address social outcomes for our students by providing enriched community based programs inside and outside of the school for example our College Access for All program. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. PS/MS 31 administration will implement the ELT program partnering with our CBO Aspira. The structure of the program is the students are identified and outreach to parents are made to stress the importance of participation and how this will address the needs of the students. The impact of student achievement will be evaluated via an examination of assessment data and overall school attendance. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 - June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Hiring of qualified instructional personnel, purchase of licensing for assessment programs and working with school partners for availability of needed space. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 the program and students will be evaluated to monitor progress towards academic and attendance goal through the monitoring of interim assessment data. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Review of interim assessment via Dropbox and Endgrade as well as attendance reports in ATS, 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Program : Small group I-Ready One-to-One When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day After school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who scored a level 1 on the Spring 2018 State ELA Test Materials: Wilson / Fundations Ready Imagine Learn Rosetta Stone Program I-Ready Materials Exemplars Ready Multimedia presentations Multimedia presentations Mathematics Students who scored a level 1 on the Spring 2016 State Math Test Science Social Studies Low performing students on their 2018 report card for science referred by the current classroom teacher. Low performing students on their 2018 report card for social studies referred by the Small group During the school day After school Small group During the school day After school Small group During the school day After school 2018-19 SCEP-P 42 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) current classroom teacher Students referred to the School Based Support Team by teachers, parents, guidance counselor or the psychologist Peer mediation Small group Counseling Crisis management Referral to outside providers During the school day After school 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) PS/MS 31 presently has 34 students in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services for STH students including at-risk counseling provided by Single Shepherd counselors and through the utilization of budgeted amount school supplies forwarded to these students and two school shirts Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 44 Services include school supplies, trips and incentives to address needs of STH population 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). The school provides on-going professional development for the staff off school site as well as on the school site in coordination with the support of Borough Field Support. Teachers meet in grade teams and in content are teams to plan and learn and analyze student work. Our school developed a comprehensive differentiated professional development plan. The plan is revised after analysis of teacher observations and trends of teacher performance throughout the school year. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). ● Kindergarten orientation: June and August ● Pre-K Parent workshops : working with children at home, common core standards ● Pre-K teachers meet regularly with Kindergarten team in order to ensure vertical curriculum alignment ● Students entering Kindergarten who are performing far below standards are eligible for academic intervention services ● Pre-K and Kindergarten parents receive progress reports throughout the year Pre-K teachers provide admin and Kindergarten teachers important information pertaining to the needs of the Pre-K students 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Professional Learning Workshops ● Consultation Committee ● MOSL committee meetings 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Rigorous Instruction Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Federal 802,297.00 X 2018-19 SCEP-P 47 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 156,303 145,650.00 14,332.00 0 3,795,273.00 X X X X Rigorous instruction Supportive Environment Collaborative Teachers Family and Community Ties 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 48   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. William Lloyd Garrison, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community [William Lloyd Garrison] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) William Lloyd Garrison , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: individual individual individual Our Title 3 program will serve three different groups of students. Group 1 will consist of Grade 2 students at the Entering and Emerging levels. Group 2 will consist of 5th and 6th graders at the Expanding and Transitional levels. Group 3 will consist of 7th and 8th graders at the Expanding and Transition levels. Two of the programs will operate on Saturdays from 8:30- 12:30 p.m. and the third will run on weekdays from 2:30pm to 4:00pm. The program will run for approximately 7 months (18 weeks) , beginning October 27, 2018. Total hours per week 12 X 16 weeks = 180 hours, this totals approximately $9600. This leaves a balance of $2766, which will be split between the their groups, with each group receiving $922. The first session will take place on October 27, 2018 and the last session will take place on Saturday, April 6, 2019. RATIONALE: Group 1: Based on our recent enrollment, we have a high influx of newcomers in Grade 2 (9). We have selected to work with this group in an effort to support their transition and to prepare them for the demands of the upcoming grades. Group 2 and 3: Both groups are comprised of Expanding and Transitional level students.. These students are less than three points away in one modality to move to the next level. . We are targeting these 20 students, and are adding any additional students who are also are on the Expanding and Transitional levels. Each group will consist of at least 10 students and no more than 12 students. Teachers will target the specific modality of need for each student and create small groups to address the needs of that modality. For example, students that only need one point in Listening will work as a group while another group of students that need one point in Writing will work in another group. A variety of material will be utilized to address the different modalities. Resources which include but are not limited to , Treasure Chest aligned common core intervention program, direct Grammar instruction, Rosetta Stone, Pimsleur, I-Ready, and Imagine Learning software programs. Teachers will also utilize NYSESLAT test prep workbook. Teacher will work with small group of students, while other groups rotate on digital programs. Teacher will use this time to conduct individual l conferences in order to assess and address individual student needs. After school program: Service Provider will be three certified ENL teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The three ENL teachers will receive Professional development from Imagine Learning. They will receive one visit, full day, during which time a consultant will show them how to pull reports and analyze data in order to meet the needs of the students. In addition they are going to attend several workshops throughout the year at the school level designed to analyze data. They will also attend monthly workshops sponsored by the DELLS: Bolstering Advanced Literacy Skills for English Language Learner, Developing Beginning English Language Learners’ Strategies and Stamina for Academic Success in English A New Pedagogical framework for English language development per session PD; The Council of Great City Schools has released a new resource, entitled A Framework for Raising Expectations and Instructional Rigor for English Language Learners that addresses challenges faced by educators who are implementing college- and career-ready standards with students who are acquiring English (per session PD study group) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Beginning December 2016, we will hold Open lab on alternating Saturdays for Parents of ELLS that are interested in using one of the many online programs specifically designed to teach English. Parents will be able to work alongside their child, as well as independently as they develop their English skills. In addition, a certified teacher will be able to provide homework assistance as well as direct instructional strategies that parents can use at home to help their child develop their English skills. Parent Coordinator Parent Workshops will be held three times over the course of the 15 weeks. They will be facilitated by the three ESL teachers and the Parent Coordinator. These workshops will cover homework assistance, strategies to assist your child at home, assisting your child with online learning programs, using online English learning programs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 59 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $10,240.00  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2766.00 13,006.00 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name William Lloyd Garrison Borough Bronx School Number 031 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal William Hewlett, Jr. Coach Elizabeth Pascale Kent ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Pilar Rivera Teacher/Subject Area Carla Ruiz, Math Teacher/Subject Area Christine Vokes, ELA Related-Service Provider Kelly Brusco Superintendent Elisa Alvarez Assistant Principal Katina Yesnick Coach School Counselor Yvette Davis Parent Dusty Figueroa Parent Coordinator Vacant Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 698 2018-19 SCEP-P 61 Total number of ELLs 99 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.18%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Tools used to assess the early literacy skills of ELLs include: Fountas and Pinnell independent/instructional running record assessments used to determine independent and instructional reading levels; I-Ready ELA Diagnostic assessment; NYC Performance assessments for writing and reading; Dolch sight words, Fundation for phonics and phonemic awareness. These literacy assessments provide all teachers with a clear picture of every student's strengths and needs, allowing the teacher to design instruction tailored to those needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  Program success is evaulated using the following data: AYP for ELLs (SED), NYC School Progress Report Card, classroom level assessments, NYSESLAT data. (see attached chart for data analysis by grade and individual students) Paste response to question here: 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures in place to address interventions include administrative cabinet meetings, grade meetings and team meetings. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] RTI is an instructional model that aims at prevention and early intervention through a tiered system of instructional support to the standard core curriculum, based on the demonstrated and changing needs of ELLS as evident in assessments and various data collected by classroom teachers and school leaders. Univesal screening is administered to all students in order to determine a baseline of student performance and identify students who are not making academic progress at expected rates. Teachers collect formative and summative assessments to be reviewed by grade teams and school leaders. Students move into Tier 2 and Tier 3 if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive support based data such as: Running Records, Writing performance assessments, i-Ready Diagnostic results, as well as additional teacher developed assessments, and ELL Periodic Assessments. Based on the data analysis, we determine whether students are benefiting from the instructional program within a reasonable time. Ongoing progress monitoring data is used to make decisions about changes in goals, instruction and/or services, as well as to consider a referral for special education services. Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. PS/MS 31 is a K-8 school, therefore we have a wide range of proficiency levels across grade levels. In prior years, the majority of our ENL students were in the Middle school grades, having entered our school in the 6 th grade. But, this year, we have a significant increase in the number of newcomers to Grade 2, 4 and 5. The 5 th grade has the largest number of Entering level as they have the largest number of newcomers. The low number of ENL students in Grade 3 is a direct result of most of last year's second grgaders passing the NYSESLAT. WE attribute this to the fact that they had smaller classes and were able to make significant growth. As a result, we only have 3 ENL students in Grade 3. This school year, half of the 12 ENL students in Grade 2 are at the Entering level, and they are newcomers and students with special needs ; the other half are Expanding. The majority of our ELL students are at the Advanced level. Most of our Beginner and Intermediate level students, in Grades 3-8 are also special education students. Lab-R results are evenly distributed, with about 1/3 in each proficiency level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Structures in place to address interventions include administrative cabinet meetings, grade meetings and team meetings. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Students In Grades K-8 receive both push-in and pull out ENL services. Across grades, ENL students are in the same class so that the ENL teacher is able to push in to the classrooms. In this way, we are able to adhere to the push-in 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  model for specific proficiency levels. In addtion, we offer pull out ENL which does cross grade levels. Typically, students within grade level NYSESLAT bands, are pulled together to receive their additional mandated minutes. We are best able to accommodate all students based on this structure. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students receive their mandated number of instructional minutes based on their proficiency level. In the begnning of the year, students are placed into classes based on ENL status so that we can best accommodate their mandated minutes. In almost all cases, students are pulled out for their explicit ENL 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In almost all cases, ENL teachers push-in to content area subjects. ENL teachers support content instruction with vocabulary instruction, and they provide additional supports and scaffolds in the classroom. ENl teachers align their instruction with the content area teachers, regularly communicating and planning instruction so it is in alignment with the common core standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking ELL students are assessed in their native language using the Spanish Lab exam. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction for ELL groups: a. We currently have 6 SIFE students. These students are all at the Beginner proficiency level. One Sife student receives pull-out ESL services. In addition he particpates in our afterschool and Saturday ELL programs. The school has provided a laptop to this student so that he can access all technology based intervention programs. b. ELLs in US schools less than three years (newcomers): Newcomer ELLs- based on NYSITELL, students receive the ESL programs and provided with appropriate instruction. o formative early literacy classroom assessments (F&P) o Milestones- Standards-based skills and strategies, research based literacy program –Components: diagnostic and placement assessment, integrated progress monitoring o Phonemic Awareness, phonics, fluency, reading comprehension (Focuses on 4 modalities of NYSESLAT) o Day program- small group pull-out program based on NYSESLAT proficiency levels (AIS) o After School- Title III- Supplemental ESL program c. ELLs receiving service 4 to 6 years.: • Small group instruction in ESL during day school- AIS - ongoing data review to monitor progress using technology, 100 book challenge • After School and Saturday- Title III- Supplemental ESL program 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  d. Long-Term ELLs (completed 6 years): • Small group instruction by AIS providers in day school • After School- Title III- Supplemental ESL program • Saturday Academy • Summer Remediation program e. Former Ells: * AIS day school program provides small group instruction • After School • ASPIRA • Saturday Academy * Former ELLs are eligible for extended time for the first two years after they test out of the NYSESLAT 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Content area material pertaining to each grade is modified for each child’s instructional level. ELL students receive support in vocabulary instruction and context clues in order to develop their own strategies for reading comprehension. ESL teachers push in to the classroom in order to support the student with grade level material, offering support in vocabulary instruction, grammar and writing. Classroom teachers have provided English-spanish glossaries and in some cases parents have received a Spanish Edition of content area material in order to assist their child at home. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? English Language Learners and Students with Disabilites have very diverse learning needs. We use curricular, scheduling, and instructional flexibility to meet the needs of these learners. All students are assessed to determine their instructional level in specific subject areas. Over the past two years, we have tried to accommodate more push-in opportunities as opposed to pull out. We have developed a schedule and organized classes so that push in can be accommodated. The push in model allows the ENL teacher to work inside the classroom, with the classroom teacher, rather than place the students in a more restrictive, pull-out class. When pushing into a classroom, the teacher is able to support the student with curriculum material, offering ENL strategies in order for the students to achieve independence when working with grade level content. The ENL teacher’s schedule was based around the student’s schedules and needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention program for ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas: • small group instruction in the modality of writing o Imagine learning IXL and i_Ready, ELA and MATH o Math- AIS- Students targeted for remediation in Math participate in Math AIS using ESL methodologies. o Extended morning program 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the Middle School Grades, as well as Kindergarten, the ESL teacher and classroom teachers are working together to plan for effective push-in ESL instruction. We have arranged the schedules of these teachers to accommodate for this planning time since we believe it will have a direct impact on the growth of our ELL students. In addition, we are implementing an afterschool program for both our 6th and 7th grade ELL students. &th graders will continue to receive the Title 3 afterschool as they did last year, and we are adding the current 6th grade to the afterschool program as well. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No changes at this time. 2018-19 SCEP-P 65  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Communicaton to parents about our programs is always transmitted in Spanish and English and now, in some cases, Arabic and French. Every attempt is made to follow up with parents, and students, in their native language. Afterschool and supplemental services offered to ELLS includes the ASPIRA afterschool program, 5 days a week; Academic afterschool at PS/MS 31, two days a week; Title 3 afterschool for 6th and 7th graders; Saturday Academy for Level 1 students that did not attend Summer School 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. This year, our school has purchased the city and state approved common core curricula in both Math and ELA. Both core instructional programs provide a wealth of ELL extensions within the curriculum. Classroom teachers, along with ESL teachers, design instruction that includes these differentiated lessons for the ELL students. Teachers have Smartboards in every classrooom that provide students with a visual and auditory presentation of content area material to support their learning. Newcomers receive a netbook or Ipad that allows them to translate some material on the spot when working directly with a teacher or group of students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Both ESL teachers are fluent in Spanish and whenever necessary, are able to communicate concepts in native languae if necessary. At other times, cases of Arabic or French, teachers will use a translate app if they feel that a student is confused or needs clarification of a concept. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Services support are provided based on students’ age, grade level, and proficiency levels in NLA and ESL. Once we have determined our ELL population, we form our instructional groups based on proficiency level and age. For those ELLS in the middle school grades, we ensure that material is engaging and appropriate for their age and grade level. This means we have high interest material that may ne at a lower level to meet their individual needs. Vice versa, we deliver grade level content at their independent instructional levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? This year, our school has purchased the city and state approved common core curricula in both Math and ELA. Both core instructional programs provide a wealth of ELL extensions within the curriculum. Classroom teachers, along with ESL teachers, design instruction that includes these differentiated lessons for the ELL students. Teachers have Smartboards in every classrooom that provide students with a visual and auditory presentation of content area material to support their learning. Newcomers receive a netbook or Ipad that allows them to translate some material on the spot when working directly with a teacher or group of students. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Parents that have prereigsterd for Kindergarten, and have indicated a home language other than English, are flagged to be contacted prior to the beginning of the new school year. In August, we conduct mailings to inform parents of the Kindergarten registration process as well as the ELL Parent Choice process. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs in 4 th and 5 th grade receive Spanish instruction once a week. 18. For schools with dual language programs: 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers are provided with professional support on NLA and ESL strategies in house and through outside agencies. ( See Professional Development in CEP.) At this time, we are registering for PD opportunities as they are offered through OELL. We are in contact with BETAC to determine upcoming PD events but may not yet received a calendar of dates available. Classroom teachers are directed to take online ELL PD webinars offered through our online PD program, PD360. ESL providers have attended onsite training from the NYCDOE, pertaiing to Aris, Acuity and ELL Interim Assessments. Paste response to question here: Professional development is provided to help all staff, including teachers, administrators, counselors, coordiantors, and paraprofessinals to understand the needs of the students as they go through the transitional periods. ESL providers attend common planning sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PGuidance counselors meet with both ESL providers and classroom teachers to discuss the ELL students transition from one level to another. The following is the way that the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff is provided: • Teachers are provided with information and attend ESL training on different topics geared to better support the ELL population, including language methodology for teaching ELL's, academic language and vocabulary development. * ESL, Bilingual and classroom teachers attend numerous workshops provided by BETAC. Teachers have attended workshops pertaining to strategies for ELL's as well as workshops pertaining to the new common core standards for ELL's. Teachers have also received on site training from NYCDOE trainers in regards to the new ELL Interim Assessments (review and analysis of data). Teachers attened workshops provided by the NYCDOE Office of ELLs. ESL providers and the Assistant Principal, maintain records of PD sessions they have attended. Paste response to question here: Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The following describes the parent involvement policy which includes parents of ELLs: • A key element in the success of PS/MS 31 is the development of an educational community. Parents have a significant and long lasting effect on their children’s growth and development as leaders and learners. 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  Components of PS/MS 31’s parent/ community involvement include the following: * parent orientation meeting in the fall (to discuss newly enrolled ELLs, instructional programs, assessments) o parent orientation in the spring (to discuss implications of testing, promotion policy, NYSESLAT, child’s programming options). o On-going workshops are scheduled by the Parent Coordinator. Ongoing workshops and guest speakers are scheduled to address topics such as: available community outreach programs (i.e. Learn To Read), obtaining a G.E.D., citizenship, adult education, parenting skills and lending library. Literacy and mathematics coaches provide hands-on workshops to strengthen parents’ knowledge of skills and strategies to support their children. (Hostos, Lincoln Hospital) o On-going grade appropriate workshops facilitated by the Literacy coach and lead teachers o Workshops to educate all parents about city-wide standards of discipline ,and academic intervention measures o Meetings to explain grade appropriate curriculum, forms of assessment used to measure children’s progress and proficiency levels students are expected to meet o Encourage parents to become members of the PTA and the School Leadership Team o Provide outreach for all parents to increase their own level of literacy by using programs such as Learn to Read and Opening The Door to Learning-Literacy is a Family Affair o Use of Power Point presentations with voice-overs to benefit bilingual parents o Encourage all parents to become volunteers and attend their children’s class trips, celebrations, assemblies, etc. o Sharing information with all parents by providing flyers, letters, and brochures in English and Spanish o Creating a lending library for parents to support strategies and skills shared at workshops 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-P 68 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, William Hewlett, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07x031 School Name: William Lloyd Garrison Superintendent: Elisa Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Information collected from the HLIS, as well as the Preferred Language ATS report, determine who needs translated documents. Student emergency cards also inform staff how to communicate with parents, especially when calling the home. Based on this data, and the high percentage of Spanish speaking families, all written documents are provided in BOTH English and Spanish. Classroom teachers are able to access this information and then utilize and contact the family as requested in the preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-P 71 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Parents preferred languages are Spanish, French and Arabic. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Almost every single piece of communication that is ditrciuted school-wide is translated in Spanish. This includes the monthly school calendar, notices about school closing, Parent Workshops, after school info and any letters from Leadership. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? *Meet the Teacher (September) and Parent Teacher Conferences ( November, March, May): We have a plethora of out of classroom staff that assist with translation services for our Spanish speaking families. Both ENL teachers, as well as ten pararprofessionals assist during confernces. We also receive assistance from ASPIRA (CBO). We will continue to 2018-19 SCEP-P 72  enlist the services of the Trnalsation Unit, who has sent interpreters for French and Arabic speaking families. Both the Dean and our Attendance teacher speak and write in Spanish. Our Parent Coordinator also speaks and writes Spanish. Our Guidance Counselor utilizes botht the spanish speaking Family worker when calling parents. In addition the Social workers communicates in Spanish. If for any reason they need to speak a language other than Spanish, we contact the Office of Translation and speak to someine over the phone. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Resources above can be found on the NYDOE Principal's Portal. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents will receive a brief survey, conducted by the Parent Coordinator , asking how they feel about the quality and availability of services. 2018-19 SCEP-P 73  2018-19 SCEP-P 74 
