 07X049 School Name: P.S. 049 WILLIS AVENUE Principal: FRANK HERNANDEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Willis Avenue School 320700010049 Pre-kindergarten 3 through 5th Grade School Number (DBN): 07X049 383 E. 139th St. Bronx, NY 10454 718-292-4623 718-292-4568 Fax: Fhernandez2@schools.nyc.gov Frank Hernández Frank Hernández Email Address: Phone Number: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jeanette Castillo Mark A. Francis TBD Rosalie Perez N/A United Way of NYC District Information Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Cortlandt Avenue Room 102 Bronx, NY 10451 Ralvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-742-6500 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director:   1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, NY 10462 / One Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-5643 Phone Number: 718-828-5643 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Frank Hernández Jeanette Castillo Mark A. Francis Nancy Lorenzo Rosalie Perez Adrianne Prosini Crystal Lopez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Chairperson/Teacher Member/Secretary/Teacher Member/ teacher   Nieves Ojendiz Camerina Galvez Berenice Dominguez Guadalupe Gumaro Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ teacher Parent Parent Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school’s mission statement illustrates the belief that a positive relationship between school and community is vital to our collective success. "In a collaborative effort, the Mott Haven Community, parents, staff and students of P.S. 49X will create a nurturing and safe environment that promotes respect and high standards, fosters the love of learning and celebrates diversity. Our mission is to encourage our students to become critical thinkers and to ensure that they are on or above grade level in literacy, mathematics, science, technology and social studies upon promotion.”   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 49X The Willis Avenue School, located within the Mott Haven neighborhood of the South Bronx, serves the needs of 665 students who represent the diversity of the community. P.S. 49X serves a diverse population. Our school demographic is as follows: 649 338 52.08% 311 47.92% Total Student Population School Level Elementary 649 100% Gender Male Female Ethnicity Hispanic American Indian or Alaskan Native Asian Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander Black White Multi-racial Not Reported English Language Learners (ELL) ELL Special Education (Total students with IEPs excluding PreK) Percent of students with IEPs at this school who: 27 15.7% receive Related Services only spend less than 20% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services 14 8.14% spend between 21 and 59% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services 5 2.91% spend >60% of their week in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes received Self-Contained services >60% of the week records in progress 451 69.49% 2 0.31% 1 0.15% 1 0.15% 182 28.04% 6 0.92% 6 0.92% 0 0% 67 38.95% 59 34.3% 0 0% 87 13.41% 172 26.5% In order to help meet the needs of our students, we have partnered with consultants in literacy, mathematics, and technology as well as our collaborate with local schools as part of the Learning Partners Program. These partnerships have supported teaching, leading, and learning at PS 49X. Our ongoing collaborative efforts and commitment to excellence have helped strengthen teacher content and pedagogy, implementing best classroom practices across the school in all content areas and have led to increased student achievement in literacy and mathematics. In order to help serve the needs of the whole child, our school has also joined forces with Children’s Health Fund to provide on-site health services to the students and families of our school community. To reinforce and strengthen student growth, P.S. 49X has instituted a school-wide STAR initiative. Students begin every day with the STAR student declaration stating: “P.S. 49 students are STARs. We are Scholars, who Treat others with kindness, Act responsibly and, Respect themselves and others”. We take pride in establishing a learning environment conducive to maximizing the learning experience for each and every student. The tone of the building and classroom environments are warm and welcoming, providing a safe space for learning experiences. 0  Classrooms in the upper grades are departmentalized, giving classroom teachers the opportunity to become experts in their subject areas. Classrooms grades 2nd through 5th now reflect math/science and ELA/Social Studies learning environments. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our student population is compromised of 650 students, of which 172 students (approximately 26.5%) are students with disabilities (SWD). Students with disabilities receive the following services: Self-contained, ICT, SETSS, OT, PT, & Speech. Our English as a Native Language (ENL) population is compromised of 87 students (approximately 13.41%) and consists of the following services: Dual Language PreK - 2nd Grade / Transitional Bilingual in grades 3 - 5, ENL Push-In/Pull-Out K-5. Our goal is to scaffold and differentiate instruction to ensure all students including SWD's and ENL's have access to the Common Core standards in literacy and mathematics resulting in progress and performance gains on standardized assessments. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Applying the Framework for Great Schools at PS 49X has supported our schools vision for school improvement. During this past school year, our school community experienced much success in most elements of the Framework including: Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, Effective School Leadership, and Strong-Family Community Ties. As as a result, we received seven well-developed ratings on the Quality Review and three proficient ratings as well as an increase of 14% in overall mathematics proficiency on the Common Core exams. As part of our ongoing commitment to educating the whole child, we offer robust arts instruction in all performing and visual arts disciplines (Art, Dance, Theater, and Music). This year, we are pleased to pilot Computer Science for ALL and offer STEM instruction to fourth and fifth graders. Our scholars in grades four and five have the choice of arts majors as a form of enrichment. Giving students the ability to choose an area of interest is leading to wonderful experiences for both students and staff. We showcase our students at two celebratory events in both the Winter and Spring seasons. Students representing music, art, dance and theater majors will have the opportunity to showcase their talents for the entire school community. Our instructional focus this year is writing across the content area. We will apply close reading strategies to text and respond to text dependent questions using the R.I.D.D. short response framework. It is expected that writing across the content area will support greater performance and progress in literacy as measured by the NYS Common Core exams. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X049 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 657 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 63 61 36 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 24 18 36 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 94.8% % Reduced Lunch 14.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 72.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.21 3% 34% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 36.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 90% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 69 71 36 91.7% 1.7% 27.4% 25.6% 0.5% 1.1% 6 8% 7.7 53.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our students have made consistent progress and performance gains each year. We have also consistently decreased the number of level ones each year in literacy and mathematics. This past year, 36% of our scholars were on or above grade level on the ELA. While this demonstrates a decreases of 1.5% from last school year, the previous school years we increased 12% in literacy. In mathematics, 54% of our scholars are on or above grade level. an increase of 14% from last school year. While we are pleased the overall improvement of our scholars, we are committed to strengthening teacher content and pedagogy in order to strengthen rigorous instruction at PS 49X. This need was reflected in the fact the school is approaching the established target in student progress, student achievement, and closing the academic gap. While clearly overall purposeful decisions were made to build coherence in Common Core aligned curricula and content, more differentiation needs to be done. Differentiation could be accomplished through the continued use of a workshop model in ELA or other pedagogues providing both additional scaffolding of instruction, to students performing below grade level, and enrichment opportunities to students who have demonstrated abilities to perform at a higher level. Professional development focusing on tiered instruction, lesson engagement, and updated best classroom practices in ELA will assist in more effective instructional delivery thereby increasing student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers in all K-5 classrooms will implement the workshop model of instruction resulting in 65% of students increasing 3 or more reading levels as measured by the Fountas & Pinnell Benchmark assessment. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. Curriculum and Instruction Teachers a. Implementing new literacy curriculum Wonders Reading in K-5. b. Modify and scaffold Wonders Reading on each grade level to meet the needs of all learners. September 2018 and ending June 2019 a. Assistant Principals and instructional leads will assist teachers in implementing Wonders Reading. Sept 2018 and ending June 2019 2. Professional Development Teachers a. Provide continued professional development in the understanding of the Common Core Learning Standards, differentiation, and scaffolding during grade conferences and professional development days. b. Provide professional development on unpacking the common core aligned units of study in literacy implementing scaffolding differentiation. c. Teachers will participate in Citywide and network Wonders Reading professional development. d. Utilize resources, including but not limited to, Exemplars, Common Core Library, and other web resources to support literacy instruction. b. Teachers, Administrations, Consultants, data specialist a. Assistant Principals will meet weekly with grades k-5 teachers for professional developments in the understanding of the Common Core Learning Standards either during Monday Professional Development periods or other appropriate times. b. Administrators and coaches will provide professional development weekly either during the Monday Professional Development Periods or other appropriate times to continue on unpacking the 4  October 2018 and ending June 2019 3. Supervision: Teachers A. School leaders will collect and analyze data as contractually appropriate (Literacy: performance based assessments; lesson plans). Together with staff, they will develop an action plan to determine the next steps. B. The Principal, Assistant Principal, Coaches, Instructional Leads, and our instructional support specialists and consultants will help K – 5 teachers modify curriculum in ELA, to meet the needs of all learners including English Language Learners and Special Education students. C. The Principal and Assistant Principals will conduct at least one formal / informal classroom observation a month to monitor the successful implementation of the curriculum to ensure instruction and student work is CCLS-aligned. common core align units of study and guiding how to scaffold those alignments in literacy. c. Selected teachers will participate in citywide and network literacy professional development. d. Teachers will utilize resources, including but not limited to, Exemplars, Common Core Library, and web resources to support literacy instruction. a. Administration will collect data and regularly analyze data beginning September 2018 through June 2019. b. Beginning October 2018 and ending June 2019, Instructional Leads and Administrators will meet monthly during the Monday Professional Development time to modify programs to meet the needs of learners. c. Beginning October 2018 and ending June 2019. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Parent Workshops families will be supported in understanding and addressing the Common Core Curriculum, as well as, the understanding that Rigorous Instruction is customized and motivating, students are engaged in intellectual activities in order to develop critical thinking skills leading to Career and College Readiness. Parent workshops will be held from Sept. 2018 monthly through June 2019. Teachers will also provide information and instruction at these monthly meetings, as well as at monthly PA meetings. Key personnel responsible will be the Parent Coordinator, Instructional Team Leaders, Classroom teachers, Math & Literacy Coach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Materials and anchor texts for Wonders Reading consumables need to be purchased yearly. Instructional coaches in both literacy and math are needed to help successfully implement these programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Through the use of data available from Apperson, MOSL, F & P, and SAMS report, we can monitor progress of each and all identified students. By the mid-point benchmark, we are looking for students in ELA to have risen by 1 to 2 reading levels from a previously assessed F & P baseline assessment in September of 2018. Mid-point monitoring will take place between December 2018 and February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Instruments of measure include but not limited to Fountas & Pinnel Running Records, Math & Reading Unit Assessments, Writing Tasks, as well as formative assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the Learning Environment Survey, 79% of the teachers that students follow the rules in class.” 2017-18 P.S. 49X School Quality Snapshot In an effort to establish a stronger and safer school environment, P.S. 49X will engage in the following activities: weekly teaching of the Social Emotional Learning curriculum to students, introduce CASEL (SEL Framework in grades 4 & 5), monthly professional developments in social-emotional learning to staff, ongoing counseling programs with Counseling in Schools for students, a STAR Student behavioral plan which includes daily and weekly STAR Student incentives, and a STAR Student Declaration. Introducing a social emotional learning curriculum establishes the ability to strengthen a school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers and peers. By addressing the social emotional needs of the student, their ability to communicate feelings and thoughts effectively will provide access to feeling safer within their school environment. Establishing the support emotionally from teachers and peers will strengthen notions in other academic areas as well. Support will be more evident through awareness and a culture of a risk taking and safe environment will begin to take shape. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers in all PK-5 classrooms will implement the 4R's Social Emotional Learning curriculum resulting in a 10% reduction of DOE Level 5 infractions. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The 4Rs Program (Reading, Writing, Respect & Resolution) The 4Rs builds on an engaging, interactive curriculum that uses great children's literature as springboard. In weekly lessons, teachers engage students in reading, writing, discussion, and skills practice aimed at fostering caring, responsible behavior School-wide STAR Initiative – In September, students were given STAR student expectations that were established for all areas of the school. Students will engage in a daily declaration. Students are recognized daily and monthly for exhibiting strong social emotional awareness. There is a common language and expectation throughout the entire school community. All student populations participate in this program, the classroom teacher has the ability to teach the material to meet the needs of each student in their classroom. During upcoming parent engagement afternoons there will workshops designed to discuss the themes and messages of current and upcoming units in the 4Rs curriculum. The curriculum has a parent/home component giving families the opportunity to participate in similar discussions from that week’s lesson. During monthly award ceremonies, the family of the STAR student of the month is also asked to join their child on stage in recognition. Trust will be strengthened when staff, students and their families can communicate effectively. The P.S. 49X community will work toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, an emphasis of Students in grades PK – 5 September 2018 – June 2019 Students in grades PK – 5 September 2018 – June 2019 Parents/Guardians of P.S. 49 students. January 2019 – May 2019 Classroom teachers will teach weekly lessons on a given theme school wide during 5 week units. The school’s Social Emotional Learning (SEL) team will oversee the school’s use and implementation of the program. The P.S.49X school community including staff, teachers and administrators will reinforce STAR student behavior at all times within each school day. Classroom teachers and support staff will lead workshops on 4R themes and units. Parents/Guardians of P.S. 49 students. Sept 2018 – June 2019 P.S. 49X staff, parents, students and administrators. 8 respect will be reinforced through weekly lessons in school and at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Parent Workshops families will be supported in understanding and addressing the Common Core Curriculum, as well as, the understanding that Rigorous Instruction is customized and motivating, students are engaged in intellectual activities in order to develop critical thinking skills leading to Career and College Readiness. Parent workshops will be held from Sept. 2018 monthly through June 2019. Teachers will also provide information and instruction at these monthly meetings, as well as at monthly PA meetings. Key personnel responsible will be the Parent Coordinator, Instructional Team Leaders, Classroom teachers, Math & Literacy Coach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom teachers will receive a grade level kit that provides the resources needed to teach weekly lessons. A designated time of 1 instructional period (45 minutes) will be used weekly to teach the program. Lessons will be taught school wide during the same instructional period. A staff developer from Morningside Center will come bi-weekly to P.S. 49X to help support the implementation of the program. In grades 4-5, SEL will be taught daily using the CASEL Framework. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At February’s mid-point check in survey, we will identify the number of level 4 and 5 infractions from this point last year, looking for a decrease by at least 5-10% which is half of our desired result by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Through the OYSD report we will compare the statistics available on our level 4 and 5 discipline infractions between the years 2016-2017 (Level 4 = 23 / Level 5 = 5) and 2017-2018 (Level 4 = 12 / Level 5 = 2). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As part of schools core beliefs, we are committed to investing in teachers as a means to support higher student achievement for our scholars. We are committed to learning from and with each other through the process of inter-visitation, teacher team (vertical and horizontal) as well as collaborating with other schools in our Learning Partners Program Triad. According to the Learning Environment Survey, 92% of the teachers collaborate with each other to plan, talk about instruction, and design instructional programs at our school. Analysis of our instructional data indicates that we must continue monitoring our teaching and sharing our best practices. Accordingly, we will continue to improve our teacher teams so that we can practice strategies learned in professional development. Teachers will continue to participate in inter-visitations and lesson studies using - protocols, analyzing and aligning student work with assessment checklists and feedback so that we can group students and prepare tasks that are at multiple entry points for our SWDs, ENLs, Bottom Third and Enrichment students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will collaboratively participate in data driven teacher teams to improve teacher content and pedagogy as evident by a reduction of level 1 students in mathematics by 10% as measured by the EnVisions baseline assessment. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Learning Community Teachers Grades pk-5 Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers and school leaders are committed to their own professional growth and development. By developing professional learning communities by grade and department, we will share best practices and implement school wide reform that will ensure consistency and coherence across the grade and school. Weekly teacher team meetings along with rubrics that are aligned with the Common Core Standards will help teachers in providing specific feedback for all students as well as SWD, and ENL's, during one on one conferencing, small group instruction, independent reading, and visual support. Sept 2018- June 2019 All Pre K-5 classroom teachers, including SWD and ENL teachers Teaching Matters literacy and math consultants, Classroom teachers, instructional coaches, model teachers, school leaders will meet to plan and prepare lesson study as well as coordinates focused inter-visitations. Teaching Matters literacy and math consultants, Classroom teachers, instructional coaches, model teachers, school leaders will meet to plan and prepare lesson study as well as coordinates focused inter-visitations. Instructional Leaders, Data Specialist, Consultants and Administrators Through weekly Professional Development and monthly Parent Workshops on Common Core, teachers will address the needs of the students ensuring student growth and success leading to the achievement of individual, as well as groups of students , including ENL's, SWD's, Bottom Third and Enrichment students. Learning Partners Program Host School All Pre K-5 classroom teachers, including SWD and ENL teachers LPP Team Sept 2018- June 2019 1 Sept 2018- June 2019 LPP Team & School Team  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Parent Workshops families will be supported in understanding of how Collaborative Teaching and sharing Strategies helps to promote teacher - parent collaboration in addressing the needs of their children. Parent workshops will be held from Sept. 2018 monthly through June 2019. Key personnel responsible will be the Parent Coordinator, Instructional Team Leaders, Classroom teachers, Math and Literacy Coach. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Classroom teachers, RTI Providers, Math Coach, ELA Coach, Data Specialist, Instructional Leaders, Paraprofessionals, and Administrators, will be using, but not limited to LLI, i-Ready, Conferring Notes, Professional and Consumable instructional materials for the regular day and after school program. Per-diem teachers and per session will be allocated for professional development and teachers will participate in inter-visitations at least twice a year to ensure coherence and consistency across the grades the school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, mid-year benchmarks will indicate school progress toward meeting student goals using the F & P Running Records, as well as unit assessments in reading and math indicating students reading levels (below level, on level, and approaching level) and student growth,as well as math assessments, mid-year assessments are given every 6 to 8 weeks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By the end of February 2018, 75% of the teacher attendance at grade meetings, etc.. will be reviewed as well as their participation in a lesson study. At that time, teachers should have been meeting regularly and have participated in one lesson study. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher observations for the 2017-18 school year reflect that 82% of our teachers were rated effective and 4% were rated highly effective. Among the component averages on Danielson's Framework, school-wide component 2a- Respect and Rapport was rated the highest (3.03) and component 3D- Using Assessment in Instruction was rated the lowest (2.80). As such, our school is committed to learning focus area to assessment practices and improving formative practices in the classroom to enhance student achievement. Assessment practices is an ongoing part of our feedback process and priority this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school administrators will facilitate at minimum two inter-visitations with each department which will result in an improvement of teachers MOTP rating by at least one performance level in teacher performance in component 1a of Danielson's Framework. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Development provided by Generation Ready and Teaching Matters, specifically in how to provide feedback, We will do this by improving teacher clarity - clear kid- friendly teaching points and/or goal - setting, establishing assessment criteria and constructing knowledge during cycles of feedback so that students are able to take ownership of their learning . Professional development includes teach team meetings, learning walks, inter visitations, cycles of observations, one on one feedback. The instructional staff will demonstrate and execute lessons for peers will include providing clear and precise feedback, peer intervention, small group instruction, and student support strategies. Parents will be invited to attend workshops that will provide them with the essentials of common core and how to help ensure that they play an integral role assisting in their child’s learning. Workshops will be planned about parent-teacher conferences and what are the right questions to ask about their child’s progress and placement. With monthly Professional Development and monthly Parent Workshops including conversations parents and teachers will address the needs of the students ensuring student growth and success. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Grades pk-5 Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Grades pk-5 Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Grades pk-5 Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers Grades pk-5 Sept 2018- June 2019 Instructional Leaders, Data Specialist, Consultants, Administrators Instructional Leaders, Data Specialist, Consultants, Administrators Instructional Leaders, Data Specialist, Consultants, Administrators Instructional Leaders, Data Specialist, Consultants, Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through Parent Workshops families will be supported in understanding of how Effective School Leadership helps to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to address the needs of their children. Parent workshops will be held from Sept. 2018 monthly through June 2019. Key personnel responsible will be the Parent Coordinator, Instructional Team Leaders, Classroom teachers, RTI Providers, Math Coordinator, Data Specialist, and the ENL Coordinator. 4  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development will be provided to all Pre K-5 teachers, including SWD and ENL teachers, resources include consumable and non-consumable instructional materials i.e laptops, non-fiction literature, for the regular school day, as well as for for the after school and ELLA programs. Classroom teachers will receive additional preparation periods per week for common planning, 30 Per Diem days will be used to hire substitute teachers for classroom inter visitations, while our instructional leaders will continue to support best teacher practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 65% of the teachers will improve at least one level in component 1a. Progress monitoring will include mid-year conversations with teachers to discuss their assessment practices in their classroom. Feedback will be provided in during post observation conferences, written feedback, next steps for improvement, and if needed a teacher improvement plan. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. This will be evident by the appropriate agendas and attendance for each administrator. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Learning Environment Survey, 90% of parents feel that our school offers a wide variety of courses, extracurricular activities, and services to keep their child interested in school. In order to support higher parental outcomes for this indicator, we will partner with the United Way of NYC and the Children's Health Fund. We believe that by doing so scholars will have access to greater opportunities inside and outside of the school as well as creating stronger family and community ties this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, PS 49X will partner with two Community Based Organizations (Children’s Health Fund and United Way of NYC) to increase family and community ties resulting in an increase of 10%- 15% in parental involvement and engagement as evidenced by monthly PA attendance sheets. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly Parent outreach and conference night, Parent workshops on curriculum, newsletter, and a monthly Family night. Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 Teachers and Administrators Monthly workshops - Children's Health Fund & Parent Collective (UNWNYC) Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 With the collaboration of a teacher parent team, parents will be able to attend bi - monthly parent meetings in order to foster an understanding of grade level curriculum and expected student outcomes. Parents Sept 2018- June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parent associations in conjunction w/administration and other outside resources Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Teacher Parent Team If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. United Way of NYC, Children's Health Fund, Bronx Children's Museum, Arts Connection, NYCFC, Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will provide office space and equipment for the staff of United Health to run their operation from within our school. Space within the school auditorium will also be utilized for monthly parent association meetings. Parent volunteers and Parents Association staff will be needed to help facilitate Parent meetings and workshops. Teachers will be needed to help provide monthly workshops in regards to academic and social needs of students and families. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, We expect an increase of 10% - 15% increase in parental involvement and engagement as evidenced by monthly attendance. This target range is based on a year end’s goal of 20% - 25% by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. This will be evident by the appropriate agendas and attendance sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-3: Students at risk of not meeting state standards or potential holdovers 4-5: Students who scored level 1 and 2 on the state tests Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI), Fundations, Reading Rescue, iReady, iRead, MyOn, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group, push-in, pull-out, & one to one shared reading, guided reading, phonemic and phonological awareness Mathematics K-3: Students at risk of not meeting state standards or potential holdovers Front Row Ed.,guided math, math centers based on skill levels Small group, push-in, pull-out, & one to one 4-5: Students who scored level 1 and 2 on the state tests Science K-3: Students at risk ofnot meeting state FOSS, Harcourt Science, & Science tradebooks Small group, push-in, one to one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 40 minutes sessions four to five times a week to provide additional support during the school day for those students identified as needing additional support in literacy. Saturday Academy After School Winter & Spring Recess Academy 40 minute sessions five times a week to provide additional support during the school day for those students identified as needing additional support in math Saturday Academy After School Winter & Spring Recess Academy A total of 180 minutes a week 9 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) standards or potential holdovers 4-5: Students who scored level 1 and 2 on the state tests K-3: Students at risk of not meeting state standards or potential holdovers 4-5: Students who scored level 1 and 2 on the state tests Guidance/Children’s Health Fund: for those students identified as needed guidance or being at risk for crisis Speech: for those students identified as being at risk for needing IEP services SETSS: for those students identified as needing additional academic intervention within 3 to 5 instructional periods. Passport Social Studies& Social Studies tradebooks Small group, push-in, one to one A total of 180 minutes a week within 3 to 5 instructional periods. Screenings, academic intervention as needed Guidance/Children’s Health Fund: one to one, push-in and pull out as needed throughout school year Guidance/Children’s Health Fund: Throughout the school day, one period a week or as needed Speech: one to one, or small group, push-in and pull out as needed throughout the school year SETSS: one to one, small group, push-in and pull out as needed throughout the school year Speech: Throughout the school day, one period a week or as needed SETSS: Throughout the school day, one period a week, or as needed 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 105 students, including 19 students in shelters and 95 students in doubled-up housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. At PS 49, students in Temporary Housing are supported in many ways including academically, socially-emotionally, and materially. The school provides uniforms and school supplies and also monitors the need for transportation assistance, providing MetroCards or scheduling bussing when needed. STH also participate in academic enrichment and extracurricular activities. STH are also supported through counseling and referrals. Other services are provided through FRIENDS, Visiting Nurse Services, Sight for Students, Lens Crafters, South Bronx Mental Health, Mott Haven Prevention, Lincoln Hospital, and Healthy and Ready to Learn - Children's Health Fund- Nydia Santiago. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment of highly qualified teachers include events such as job fairs, Open Market, partnerships with institutions of higher education, recommendations and referrals. In order to retain new teachers, we will see that they are properly paired with a mentor of similar assignments. New and veteran teachers will receive visits by staff developers to improve both their practice and comfort level with curriculum and methodology. Staff assignments will be placed based on demo lessons, past performance evaluations and teacher preference. Strategies to support Highly Qualified Teachers, a survey will be distributed to understand the preferences and needs towards professional developments. Mentor teachers and peer coaches are trained and certified by New Teacher Center and are assigned to support all struggling and first year teachers; inter-visitations with in house teachers as well as common planning time, Grade Level meetings, Teacher Team meetings, peer observations and common planning preps. Formal and Informal observations, as well as one to one conversations provide the instructional staff with feedback related to best practices. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In order to meet the Common Core State Standards, the following will be implemented to support teachers, administrative staff members, paraprofessionals and staff in professional developments: departmental meetings in which the CCSS are unpacked, inter-school classroom visitations, visitations to our sister school, etc. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 3  n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). PS 49X’s transition plan for assisting preschool children from early childhood programs to elementary school include creating a parent friendly environment, ongoing Professional Development (PD) with translators i . e. : what is expected of a kindergarten student, the Common Core Learning Standards for Kindergarten Students, prearranged visitations for incoming students and parents. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Classroom Teachers meet in grade level meetings and Teacher Teams to review student data gathered from formative and summative assessments. Classroom teachers and the Instructional Staff create weekly assessments based on the Common Core Standards that measure student growth. Classroom teachers along with the Instructional Staff, the Data Specialist, and Administration participate in bi-monthly meetings to assess student growth. Professional Development is provided to ensure that teachers are using the data to drive instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A-5E Sections 5A-5E Sections 5A-5E Sections 5A-5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 596,833.00 151,077.00 13,984.00 0 4  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 4,418,517.00 X Sections 5A-5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 5  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS49x, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS 49xt will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS49x , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 9  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 0  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 1  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 4 3 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 49 will use the Titlle III funds to enrich the existing ELL program, including our Freestanding ENL program (Gr K-5), Transitional Bilingual Program (Gr 3 - 5) and Dual Language Program (Pre K - 2). We want our students who are newcomers to develop stronger English language skills. We want to offer services to both parents and students because parents can better academically support their child at home when they have a knowledge English and the school system. In addition to developing stronger survival English language skills, our parents will hear about topics, such as immigration, job search advice and health care, from professionals who will present on those particular topics. Number of Teachers: There will be a total of 6-7 teachers working with our students. Number of weeks of operation: We will operate for 16 weeks for a total of 48 hours of extra help. The program will operate 2 days a week for 90 minutes on Wednesdays and Thursdays from January 9, 2018 through May 16, 2018. The program will invite and serve all ELL students in grades 1 - 5, which include SIFE students, newcomer students, ELLs with IEPs/ disabilities middle year ELLs and former ELLs receiving 2 years of transitional services. The teachers will be working with students in the areas of reading, writing, listening, and speaking. The program, New York State English Language Learner (Attanasio & Associates), will be used for the duration of the program, in addition to other outside materials that the teacher may find useful to differentiate instruction. Students will be expected to develop Tier II vocabulary and build real world connections . The teachers will integrate ipads because it is a motivating tool which increases participation, fosters 21st century skills and helps students with the following: 1) use visual skills to enhance reading comprehension; 2) build vocabulary and 3) strengthen writing skills. Additionally, formative and summative assessments will help track students' performance and progress. In addition to the infusion of technology, the program will include the following: TPR, modeling, scaffolding, graphic organizers, accountable talk and hands-on activities. The art component will be folded into the units of study. Each unit will have a writing component and include an oral presentation. The students will present to their parents at the end of each unit. English will be the language of instruction and all the teachers will have either Bilingual or TESOL certification. The teachers selected to work in this program will also be participating in the SIOP training as a means of providing teachers professional development that will enhance teaching and learning 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information opportunities. Authentic texts and games will be used to develop reading comprehension and language skills and will take place after school. The program will also incorporate interactive Learning through literacy games, basic patterns and structures of the English language, extensive skills practice and repetition. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: During the 2018-201 school year, teachers will participate in ongoing professional development on effective ELL strategies and practices on designated dates, as well as meetings to help plan and support ELL learning. This PD will be available to our bilingual teachers, ESL teachers, as well as monolingual teachers who have a high concentration of ELLs in their classrooms. It is designed to help teachers develop stronger language objectives and techniques. The training will occur from January 2019 to June 2019, for a total of 10 sessions that will last 60 minutes once a month. Teachers will also receive supplies and materials to implement the program. Additionally, all teachers will be offered professional development workshops, such as those offered during the school day by the Department of English Language Learners, as needed to ensure thorough training and support. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: wellness The allocation will be used to enhance our existing Title III program. Our school offers an ELL Academy on Saturdays. Parents of ELL students will be invited to participate in ESL classes. We will use the Saturday opportunity to offer ESL classes to the parents of students who are attending our ELL Academy as well as parents who want to improve their English language skills. The classes will be offered once a month beginning in January 2017. Using the program "Maestro en Casa," our ELL parents will have the opportunity to find out about basic living, health and wellness, finance, workplace navigation, education/citizenship and civic responsibility. This program will also be operating along with "We are N.Y. Program", designed to assist parents from immigrant communities with English Survival Skills and become stronger partner in their children's education. 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities We plan to serve approximately 30-40 parents, based on preferred program surveys taken by parents. All qualified parents will receive notification about the program through fliers , P.A. meetings and monthly newsletters. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. A: Afterschool instructional programs in all modalities including: Reading, Writing, Listening, & Speaking to enhance students' English language proficiency: Per session x 2 days a week x 1.5 hours a day x 4 teachers <!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%3D%22o%22%3F%2D%2D%3E--> Duration: 45 session Budgeted Amount $11,184 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. NYSESLAT Instructional Materials Grades K-5 Supplies and materials $1,858  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount $1,500 i-Ready Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 07 School Name PS 49x- The Willis Avenue School School Number 049 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Frank Hernandez Coach Angelica Jordan ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jenelle Fiori/ Diane Lam Teacher/Subject Area Joanna Gomez/ Gr 3 TBE Teacher/Subject Area Rosana Greene Related-Service Provider Mariana Peralta Superintendent Elisa Alvarez Assistant Principal Phillip Carahar Coach Monica Walker School Counselor Lisa Zwerling/Shernette Grant Parent Rosalie Perez Parent Coordinator Alexia Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Ruiz Other (Name and Title) Taryn Thomas; Testing Coach C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 5 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 600 9 Total number of ELLs 91 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.17%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): English and Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 3 1 0 1 4 1 0 1 2 0 1 1 5 1 0 1 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 3 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use both formal and informal data to assess early liteacy skills. We use the following: DRA, EDL, LLI and Wonders. In addition, we use the NYSITELL, the Spanish LAB and NYSESLAT to obtain insights into instructional level in both English and Spanish. Teachers keep running records of student reading levels using Fountas and Pinnell. Lastly, the teachers use conferencing notes, student work and running records to assess literacy skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Once summative data has been collected and aggregated, identified students receive small group instruction by an ENL teacher and/or RTI using Leveled Literacy Intervention. 0  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In order to evaluate the success of our ELL programs, we use the results of the NYSELAT, DRA2, Peformance Based Assessments in both Math and ELA, as well as the results of NYS State exams. Then, the analysis of the results is discussed amongst administrators and school staff in order to determine how to differentiate instruction for students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been collected and aggregated, identified students receive small group instruction by an ENL teacher and/or RTI using Leveled Literacy Intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] To guide instruction for Ells, the following assessments are used: Previous years NYS Assesment (Grades 3-5), Fountas and Pinnell, Iread, and Envision Math, and NYC Performance Tasks . After reviewing the assessments, students that need Tier 2 services are serviced within the classroom setting by out- of-classroom teachers. Tier 3 students will receive individualized instruction provided by related service providers. The focus will be in areas of academic difficulties using differentiated instrucion. Progress monitoring data will be used to make continual decisions on instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data has revealed that, according to the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT, students have been making progress each year in their English proficiency levels. With the revisions of the 2015 NYSESLAT, most students have either made small progress or have remained the same in their English proficiency levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Monthly ENL team meetings, grade team and vertical data chats. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Integrated and standalone ENL programs are provided by our certified ESL teachers for grades K-5. Students are grouped heterogeneously in their monolingual general ed, ICT or self contained special ed class. ESL teachers then group students both heterogeneously and homogeneously to ensure that the required minutes of service (based on English Proficiency levels) are fulfilled. Students are provided a small group setting within their regular classroom or in the ESL department office. Instruction is then provided by blending the content area Common Core Standards and the NYS Targets of Measure to ensure a rigorous curriculum that meet the learning needs of the students. Most instruction is guided using the SIOP model lesson template, which includes hands on activities, visuals, scaffolding, higher order language skills, etc. b. TBE program. If applicable. The transitional bilingual program is taught in grades K-5. Students are placed in the program based on eligibility and parent preferences. Thus, students are grouped heterogeneously within the classroom, though group work can be both a heterogeneous or homogeneous choice. Instruction is then provided by blending the content area Common Core Standards and the NYS Bilingual Common Core Standards to ensure a rigorous curriculum that meet the learning 1  needs of the students. Most instruction is guided using the SIOP model lesson template, which includes hands on activities, visuals, scaffolding, higher order language skills, etc. c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our school is a Pre-K to Grade Five school. The organization of our staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to the proficiency levels of our ELLs. Our 2 ESL teachers work with the ELLs who score Entering or Emerging on the NYSESLAT 360 minutes of ESL services per week and those who scored Transitioning and Expanding receive 180 minutes of ESL per week. Students continue to receive ESL services until they score Commanding on the NYSESLAT. Students who score Commanding, through they score a proficient level in the English Language, receive at least 90minutes of transitional services. Instruction is differentiated based upon proficiency levels in consistent with CR Part 154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the TBE program, the content areas such as math, science and social studies are delivered either in English or Spanish using either native language support or ESL strategies. The percentage of native language used varies according to the degree of dominance. Translated versions of textbooks are available in science, social studies and math. Libraries are available in both English and Spanish. Other scaffolding techniques such as contextualization, schema building, text-representation and the use of metacognition process are used as the needs arise. Content areas are taught in English using ESL methodologies. In the ESL program, the teacher also collaborates with the classroom teacher to plan for best strategies to facilitate the learning of content. Strategies such as the use of graphic organizers, Venn diagrams, visuals and realia are used to make the content comprehensible. The use of computers and smart boards also makes information more accessible. The language of instruction is simplified when necessary to facilitate content learning. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When students are enrolled in our school, their parents fill out the HLIS to identify the child's home language. If the child is an eligible candidate for ELL services, he or she is administered the NYSESLAT. Furthermore, if the child's home language is Spanish and the child does not score above the the NYSESLAT cut off score, the he or she is administered the Spanish LAB. The ELL students who are placed in bilingual classess are assessed through Wonders/ Maravillas, and students are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell for literacy, Envisions (Math), teacher observations and assessments. Ells in bilingual classes are also administered the ELE (El Examen de Lectura en Espanol) assessment in grades 3 to 5 to assess their native language Spanish reading skills. Eligible ELLs who are not Spanish speaking, are assessed through the use of non-verbal tasks, informal observations and review of student work. Spanish speaking ELLs have access to translated versions of the city and state assessments. In addition, all ELLs are entitled to use glossaries or a translator if the state test translation is not available in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE and newcomers attend extended day Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday from 8:02 tp 8:40. They receive RTI services in the classroom throughout the day. "Monday through Thursday from 3:00 pm to 5pm. Students in grades 3, 4, and 5 can also attend the Saturday academy in which Math and ELA are the focus. Another Saturday program called ELLA is also being offered to Newcomers (0-3years) and ELLs in grades 3, 4, and 5. This program will focus on teaching English through literacy and arts 2  activities. These programs will begin in October of 2017 and tentatively end in April of 2018. At this time we do not have any long term ELLs in our school. Former ELLs are offered the after-school programs in Math and ELA and/or the Saturday Academy in Math and ELA. Former ELLs will continue to receive their ELL modifications for city and state assessments for up to 2 years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers utilize the Envisions (English/Spansih) math program to help guide their curriculum, while they use Wonders in ELA. Both programs ensure that students are learning the required skill as per the NYS Common Core Standards for the appropriate grade level. General ed, ICT, self contain special ed and ESL teachers modify lessons within the afore mentioned programs to the needs of the students, such as ELL-SWDs. Instruction is given using the workshop model, which included an I do/ We do/ You do instructional strategies. Additional support for student learning include but are not limited to scaffolding, hands on materials, real-life connections, etc. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The school allows provides many outlets for ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency in a least restrictive environment using flexibility in scheduling, instruction and curriculum requirements. The IEP team meets to place students in the proper program that would fulfill the students learning needs. These programs include the self contained special ed class with additional IEP and ESL services, the ICT class with additional ESL and IEP services, the monolingual general ed class with additional ESL and IEP services, and the transitional bilingual education program with additional IEP services. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas are SETSS, ESL , Extended Day (ETS), RTI, Occupational and Physical Therapy, Speech and Language, Guidance counseling, and after-school. The language used for instruction or services is English and/or Spanish as needed. Consistent with special education guidelines, our evaluations and parent meetings are conducted in a non-discriminatory manner, in both English and Spanish for our students with special needs. Teachers differentiate instruction for all students, including ELLs, according to their needs. Programs such as Wonders allow for ESL strategies to be used. Within the academic content areas, New York Social Studies, Envisions Math and Harcourt Science have ESL components available which allow for differentiated instruction. , are also used in grades 3, 4, and 5 to explicitly teach strategies and reinforce content that are required to meet Common Core state standards, in reading , math, science and social studies. writing and vocabulary. Empire State NYSELAT is a program our school uses to support ELLs in the modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are implementing an arts and literacy program through Bronx Museum twice a week. This program begins in January and Commences in May. The program services students in grades k and 1. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time we are continuing all bilingual programs. However, due to the implementation of Dual language, we will continue to phase out of TBE as we coninue to implement Dual Language each year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have equal access to all school programs and supplemental services offered in the building. All ELLs are eligible for after-school and Supplemental Educational Services programs (SES) based on Title 1 eligibility and parental consent. They are also eligible for RTI and ETS. There is also a Saturday program called ELLA which is available to all English Learner students. Parents are notified about program availability through translated letters, parent workshops and meeting where translators are available and through phone calls. 3  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Envisions and Wonders are our Common Core aligned programs which include scaffolded activities and strategies for ELL students. Envisions, Wonders and Social Studies are also available in Spanish translated versions to support native language.We use I-ready as a computer based math program. In addition, Lexia is interactive language program for ELLs that will be used this year. Other instructional materials include but are not limited to hand on materials/ activities, visuals, teacher made worksheets, peer partnering, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language is supported in the TBE and ESL programs through the use of native language libraries within the bilingual classrooms, school library and ESL room. The ESL room is also available as a resource to all teachers in order to provide native language support. Our TBE and ESL classes have bilingual dictionaries, bilingual books and native language trade books which support native language. In addition to Estrellita, reading and writing in the native language is supported through the use of Lee and Low books; both programs promote academic vigor and are aligned with the common core standards. Additionally, the writing curriculum maps at every grade level promotes alignment and the acquisition of skills. Writing is also supported by programs and approaches such as Wordly Wise 3000, Tier II vocabulary and graphic organizers . Native language skills are reinforced through the content areas of math, social studies, and science through the use of translated versions of text books. To address alignment and strengthen reading, the K through 2 bilingual classes, will be using the Estrellita program. It is a phonics program for Spanish speakers in grades K through 2 in the TBE classes. Estrellita is an accelaterated, systematic, Spanish reading program which encompasses instruction in explicit phonemic awareness, phonics and fluency. The program provides scaffolded layers of support and differentiated instruction. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required support services and resources correspond to ELLs ages and grade levels. ELL students' periodic progress is monitored through formative and summative assessments such as the NYSESLAT and this information is used to drive ESL instruction in the four English language modalites: speaking, listening, writing and reading. All instruction is delivered with complience to the Common Core State Standards within the content area and the students cognitive and learning needs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Envisions and Wonders are our Common Core alligned programs which include scaffolded activities and strategies for ELL students. Envisions, Wonders and Social Studies are also available in Spanish translated versions to support native language.We use I-ready as a computer based math program. In addition, Lexia is interactive language program for ELLs that will be used this year. Other instructional materials include but are not limited to hand on materials/ activities, visuals, teacher made worksheets, peer partnering, etc. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). A. trained bilingual or ESL pedagogue is available to parents during the pre registration and registration process. Those individuals assist with newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year and with new Ells, who enroll throughout the school year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Besides the Spanish native language instruction within the TBE classes, language electives are not offered at our school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 4  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is provided by school staff, network staff, the office of OELL, coaches, consultant and community learning support organizations. Our school staff includes all administrators and pedagogues: For the 2015-2016 year we are focusing on topics such as: English Language Literacy, Visual Arts and the Common Core Response to Intervention Collaboration and Co-teaching: Strategies for English Learners Implementing the Estrellita Program Unpacking the TOMS and the NLAP Strengthening Language and Mathematical Competence in the classroom Unpacking the NYSESLAT-Next Steps Planning and Preparation for ELLS Questioning Techniques in the Classroom: Engaging our ELLs The intake process for clerical staff We keep a record of all professional development sessions attended by our staff, including maintaining copies of attendance records, agendas and topics provided throughout the year. Please note that some of the sessions consist of a series of workshops whereas others consist only of one workshop. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Meetings are held with APs , the ESL teacher, parent coordinator and the guidance counselor to povide parents and students with information about different schools. The packet includes informationn on transition from elementary to junior high school. The guidance counselor attends meetings and has individual as well as group meetings with the parents and students. This year, we are also being joined by the LINCs program at New York University who will discuss transition issues with our 5th graders. All professional development sessions will support the minimum of 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff members. Additional support is given throughout the year by network personnel. The minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training is given every school year. The classroom and enrichment teachers receive strategies and support with the instruction regarding ELL students, including Tier 1 and Tier II intervention. The payroll secretary maintains records for each teacher and all professional development sessions in the main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 5  P.S. 49 offers various programs to support the parents of ELLs. The main source of support is the Parent Association at P.S. 49. The Parent Association meets parents on a monthly basis to discuss and inform on topics that are valuable in the academic development our students. Some of these topics have included New York state test preparation (ELA, math, social studies, and science), Supplemental Educational Services (SES) workshops, and Middle School Choice workshops. We will soon be offering SESIS. Furthermore, the Parent Association sends an English and Spanish newsletter and calendar home on a quarterly or monthly basis which informs the parents of upcoming events (e.g. workshops, parent teas, and informational sessions). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The level of ELL parent involvement in the school is somewhat lower than average. Activated provided include, but are not limited to parent- teacher conferences, after-school workshops, individual teacher meetings, beginning of the year orientations, etc. All parent support activity is provided by schools Parent Coordinator and the Parent Advocate, to ensure that students have maximum support at home and at school, while also keeping lines of communication open between parents and teachers. All written and oral contact (face to face or over the phone) are in Spanish and English, as provided by our bilingual staff. If there is a language that our staff cannot provide, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted for further assistance. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Frank Hernandez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 49X School DBN: 07x049 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Frank Hernandez Title Principal Monica Walker Assistant Principal Alexia Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Jenelle Fiori ENL/Bilingual Teacher Rosalie Perez Parent Joanna Gomez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 9/10/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: School Name: PS 49X- The Willis Avenue School Superintendent: Elisa Avlarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration at PS 49x, parents of newly registered students must complete the NYS Home Language Survey to determine the student home language. The parent and child are then both interviewed by a trained pedagogue, such as an ESL teachers or theTesting Coordinator, in the English and the home language to determine if the child qualifies for NYSITELL and Spanish Lab R testing. If necessary, a translator will be provided by the Office of Translation and Interpretation to complete the interview. While the child is being tested, the parent completes the Student Emergency Contact cards, which asks parents the preferred language of contact in both written and oral form. Additionally, we refer to the students home language through ATS to determine the perferred language when contacting parents. As a result, we have noticed that PS 49x is comprised of mainly Hispanic students with some African American and Asian students, which include languages such as Chinese, French and other African dialects. All parent letters and phone calls are provided in both English and Spanish. If necessary, a translator is provided by the Office of Translation and Interpretation. 9  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language At PS 49x, as indicated by the Student Emergency Contact cards, the majority of preferred languages for both written and oral communication is both English and Spanish. If a parent speaks a language other than English or Spanish, the Office of Translation and Interpretation is called for assistance. These languages could include but are not limited to Chinese, French and other African dialects, as collected from the Home Language Identification Survey data. Based on the preferred language survey, however, a majority of the preferred language, in both written and oral communication, is English and Spanish. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 0  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The following documents are distributed every year and require translations for parent contact: Parent Handbooks and School Safety information are distributed in the beginning of the school year. Parent newsletters and calendars are distributed on a monthly basis; announcements for after-school, PTA meetings, school schedules, school-wide parental workshops, school information regarding testing or upcoming activities and disciplinary letters are distributed trough-out the year as needed. Entitlement letters are distributed in September to all students who were administered the NYSITEL and the NYSESLAT. Translated versions of these letters are accessed on the DOE website. All other letters, such as teacher newsletters, field trip notices, etc, are translated in-house by a qualified staff member. All the above mentioned information are provided in both English and Spanish, which is our largest language minority group. If necessary, the Office of Translation and Interpretation is contacted for further assistance. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to During the beginning of the year formal face-to-face meetings will include: -Meet the Teacher Night -New Registrant Orientation provide interpretation service(s)? 1  Throughout the rest of the year meetings will include: -Parent Association Meetings (Monthly) -Test Orientation Parent Meeting (Fall and Spring) -Formal Ceremonies such as graduation, community nights, and other school events -Parent-Teachers Conferences (November and March) Family Engagement Time (Tuesdays) -Parent Workshop -Parent Contact: In-Person, Telephone or email -Parent Classes: Technology, Foreign Language, Open Access Library, ESL Student Report Card Distribution at the end of instructional marking periods (October 30th, December 18 th , March 4 th , May 6 th and June 17th) Anticipated informal interactions include but are not limited to parent contact for the purpose of attendence, guidence counselor contact, behavioral/academic purposes, shared information, etc. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, PS 49x will fullfill parental notification requirements for translation and interprestation services as follows: -A welcome poster is placed visibly upon entering the school. -Language ID Guide is placed on the security desk and placed on the office counter in the main office. -The Parents' Guide to Language Access and Parents Bill of Rights are given as soon as possible during the Parent Coordinator's Parental Meeting. This information is provided and discussed in both English and Spanish. All official school documents will be provided in both English and Spanish at the easiest availability to the parent. If necessary, translation services will be provided by the Office of Translation and Interpretation for further parent communication and understanding of the above information. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Information regarding parent feedback regarding the quality and availabilty of services will be provided at the start of the school year to understand parent preferences regarding parent educational programs. At the end of the year another survey will be distributed to assure parent opinions regarding the quality and availability of services. All surveys will be provided in both Spanish and English to assure communication. If necessary, translation services will be provided by the Office of Translation and Interpretation. Surveys will include questions regarding preferred language, availability of programs and student educational services, availability of staff to make parents feel welcomed in the school, sense of community within the school, etc.All parent feedback will be analyzed and considered when planninng parent educational services and other parental contact throughout the school year. 3 
