2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X070 School Name: P.S. 070 MAX SCHOENFELD Principal: KERRY CASTELLANO 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information PS70 THE MAX SCHOENFELD SCHOOL 09X070 School Number (DBN): 320900010070 K-5 1691 WEEKS AVE, BRONX, N.T. 10457 718-583-6000 Phone Number: 718-583-6006 Fax: KERRY CASTELLANO KCASTEL@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: KERRY CASTELLANO THOMAS CONABOY JOSE OTERO SILKIA MELENDEZ Ericka Lee N/A N.A N/A District Information Geographical District: 9 Superintendent’s Office Address: LETICIA RODRIGUEZ ROSARIO Superintendent: 1245 Washington Ave, Bronx 10456 LROSARIO2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7143 Phone Number: 718-410-7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Bronx, District 9 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) KERRY CASTELLANO THOMAS CONABOY JOSE OTERO ERICKA LEE n/a n/a n/a SILKIA MELENDEZ NAYDINE FERGUSON GUERLINECOTHIA *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/TEACHER, CHAIRPERSON Member/TEACHER Member/TEACHER 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5 Signature (Blue Ink) Name ANGELA OTERO DIANE JONES CHRISTINE LOPEZ ERICKA LEE LILLIAMCAMUY SONIA PARRAS SAKINAHBELL JOANAOTERO SYLVANASANCHEZ Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ TEACHER Member/PARAPROFESSIONAL Member/ DC 37 REPRESENTATIVE Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement: Section 4: SCEP Overview Our mission is to provide a rich diversity of academic and social experiences that beckon students, parents and staff and inspires them to become meaningful contributors to society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Context: PS 70 is situated in the South Bronx and has a student population of 1,111, with 72.77% Hispanic, 25.61% Black, 1.13% White, 3 Asian, 3 Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander & Multi-Racial . We have 23.34% ELLs and 19.53% SWD students. In addition, our population is made up of 42.24% Female and 52.76% Male. Partnerships - The organization Midori and Friends has developed a chorus program in an after- school setting. In order to work toward our mission we set strategic goals each year and these are widely distributed and highlight avenues for participation by representatives of the whole school community. - Professional Development and On site School Support - We have partnered with a number of outside professional organizations including Fordham University (ENL consultancy) and teachers from Grade 1 and 4/5 who are undertaking a two-year implementation of ‘Teacher Rounds’, a program that has connections to authors from Harvard University. Resource Specialist, Fordham University, is supporting our K-1 pilot Dual Language program by conducting PD throughout the school year, by engaging with students in these activities will help teachers to create a classroom culture where their students’ voices are valued, students can feel that their needs will be attended to, and where they can trust and respect their teacher, so that learning can take place. As teachers continue to collect and compile student data, a meaningful and useful profile will emerge, gaining a deeper understanding and sensitivity to the needs of their students. Armed with this cadre of information, teachers can respond to individual differences when planning units of study. By placing an emphasis on “knowing” the students, will assist in supporting the development of a curriculum that connects to their lives. While we use Teachers College Reading/Writing units of study we have a Teaching Matters Staff Developer providing supports for our literacy program and especially targeting our new teachers this year. DOE provides 2 Universal Literacy Coaches who will continue to work with K,1 and 2 teacher teams. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  We have a high degree of mobility and we are in the top 1% of all NYC schools with a high percentage of students living in shelters in this school community, that is, 237 students representing 18% of our school population. Having students who are homeless and/or live in shelters can be challenging, necessitating ingenuity, creativity, and patience. School is a vitally important part of the homeless student’s life, for it can present the student with a sense of stability and our teachers play a major role in providing that kind of predictability support. Students with high mobility rates generally lose about three months of reading and math learning each time they switch schools. Mobility can be particularly hard on children in the early grades, as they learn foundational skills. The more often students moved, the lower they scored on assessments and on teacher observations of the students’ critical thinking abilities. High mobility during the school year disrupts our tracking of student achievement that will effectively allow us to try to ensure continuity of intervention, counselling and support services for the student and the family. The goal for second language students is to function as proficient learners in the classroom. If an ELL is given a task that he or she cannot compete successfully because the task is beyond the student’s current level of language functioning, then the student may lose his or her motivation to succeed. Therefore, it is imperative to know the student’s English proficiency level and assign appropriate tasks and challenges. Learning disabilities are associated with problems in listening, reasoning, memory, attention, selecting and focusing on relevant stimuli, and the perception and processing of visual and/or auditory information. These perceptual and cognitive processing difficulties are assumed to be the underlying reason why students with learning disabilities experience one or more of the following characteristics: reading problems, deficits in written language, underachievement in math, poor social skills, attention deficits and hyperactivity, and behavioral problems. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Key Areas for Focus in 2018-19 Element of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress over the past year is Tenet 2 – School Leader Practices and Decisions: - PD on Danielson Domain 3d Assessment - Feedback on learning is an essential element of a rich instructional environment; without it, students are constantly guessing at how they are doing and at how their work can be improved. The Danielson rubric states that for feedback to be valuable it must be timely, constructive, and substantive and must provide students with the guidance they need to improve their performance. We will focus on working with teachers to encourage them to address writing issues with their students, either in small group or individual settings as well as with their entire class, during the mini lesson. - Provided Constructive Feedback Geared Toward Improvement of Future Writing -Learning to write is an apprenticeship and the support that yields the greatest result is provided at the point of need, so they will save time and energy in classes by making use of small group guided practice. Many student writers, especially those who have limited control, need expert guidance in a small-group setting, as they attempt to bridge the gap between the teacher's modeling and their own independent writing. - Helped Students Analyze and Revise their Writing. For revision to be authentic, students must first believe that their writing can be improved, and second, they must have a variety of tools to choose from when revising. Most importantly, students must also wantto improve the writing, which means they have to care about what they're writing, and therefore be fully engaged. We will develop our skills in this regard and expand our use of mentor texts as a strategy that will help students become more engaged in locating suitable mentor texts to improve their own writing drafts. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  - We have a structure of teams that meet on a regular basis for collaborative decision making in support of their team goal. In addition to grade level teams K-5, we have: Instructional Literacy Team (7 members, AP), Instructional Math Team (7 members, A.P.), SLT(10 members, Principal), Professional Development Team (7 members, Principal), MOSL Team (3 members, A.P.), Mentoring Team (2 members), AIS Team (12 members), Child Study Team (4 members, AP), RTI/SIT Team (3 members, AP), Building Response Team (8 members, 2 APs, Principal), Safety Instructional Leaders (7 members), Mobility Team (6 members),Teacher Round Team (3 lead members) and Attendance Team (8 members, AP). This collaborative team structure provides strong support for our school goals; student achievement and pedagogical improvement. Our major area of focus for the coming year is Tenet 4, Teacher Practices and Decisions, with an instructional focus is SMALL GROUP GUIDED INSTRUCTION that will be implemented in Literacy & Mathematics, to be rigorously tailored to assist the range of learners so they will have the necessary strategies & skills to work independently. We need to continue to support teachers through the differentiate professional development program we have set up, our differentiated instructional support for teachers experiencing challenges in certain areas of the curriculum as defined by our observations, our data meetings with individual teachers. - We have a strong commitment to the use of technology within classrooms via means of SMART boards and laptops, purchased to engage students in high interest activities such as interactive movements of math tools, to visually formulate and express math equations, thus engaging students in meaningful work. - PS 70 strategically aligns support to maintain a safe and inclusive culture which permeates throughout the school, encouraging adult and student learning and to increase student academic and personal growth. In collaboration with the parent coordinator, teachers, and parent teams make school improvements via presentations of workshops that include the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS), English as a New Language (ENL) and Special Education workshops to support families to develop an understanding of the demands of the CCLS to best support their children. - Our curriculum includes the arts that form an important component to the overall academic that we provide at PS 70. Students are able to explore dance, music and visual arts throughout their learning experience across the grades. We work with classroom teachers to incorporate the arts across the curriculum, whenever possible as well as our implementation of visual arts and dance, for classes in multiple grades during the school day. After- school students also have opportunities to engage in dance with school teachers, and professionally taught music classes, so that as many students as possible are able to participate. As our students grow, the arts provide them with well-rounded experiences that augment their development as scholars. - The workshop model is used in all grades ensuring alignment to CCLS, as supported by our coaches and grade team leaders, who then build professional capacity with teacher peers via modeling lessons, inter-visitations or individual support. - One of the strengths of the school’s SCEP is that our action plan was developed by a team of administrators, teachers, staff and parents. The goals were developed with new initiatives from New York State and New York City, specifically the common core curriculum and the Charlotte Danielson Framework. Our major area of focus for the coming year is Tenet 4, Teacher Practices and Decisions, with an instructional focus is SMALL GROUP GUIDED INSTRUCTION that will be implemented in Literacy & Mathematics, to be rigorously tailored to assist the range of learners so they will have the necessary strategies & skills to work independently. We need to continue to support teachers through the differentiate professional development program we have set up, our differentiated instructional support for teachers experiencing challenges in certain areas of the curriculum as defined by our observations, our data meetings with individual teachers. School Quality Guide 2017-18: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  3.25 Rigorous Instruction 3.33 Collaborative Teachers 3.30 Effective School Leadership 2.88 Strong Family-Community Ties 3.12 Trust Challenges - Areas of improvement included specific components of the Charlotte Danielson Framework, specifically 3b and 3d. There was also an overall improvement in a reduction of superintendent’s and principal’s suspensions, as well as an increase in parent participation. - We have a high degree of mobility, and our research into this has revealed that 40% of students that began in Kindergarten are currently still enrolled in Grade 5 in 2017. Therefore 60% of 5th grade students are new to our school throughout their elementary school years. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. We will align all class schedules to enable all grades have the same literacy, math and prep periods for purposes of meeting to review student work samples, assessment information, and to plan and adjust units and lesson plans. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X070 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1227 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 97 97 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 55 50 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 94.9% % Reduced Lunch 28.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 73.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.08 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 69% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 94 93 89.3% 1.6% 19.9% 24.9% 0.2% 0.2% 8 24% 6.2 23.8% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. SOP(s) Addressed X X X X 3.3 3.4 3.5 The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Student population - 1,111 student population At this time there are 286 students registered for temporary housing, shelters, and doubled up - 96% students are eligible to receive Free Lunch - 3% students eligible for reduced cost lunch - 23.34% school population in (288 students) are classified English New Learners - 19.53% or 241 Special Education students School Survey 2017-18 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  52% parents took the School Survey (490) 99% teachers took the School Survey (93) Score 2017-18 School Quality Guide 3.25 Rigorous Instruction 3.33 Collaborative Teachers 3.30 Effective School Leadership 2.88 Strong Family Ties 3.12 Trust Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 25% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 14%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 11%  10% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  18% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  119 of Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 53 additional students  14% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 13%  20% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 8%  30% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 13% Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 24% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 15%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 9% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  7% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  15% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 5%  26% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 10%  17% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  23% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSMath Test in 2017 an improvement of 11%  25% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSMath Test in 2018 an improvement of 8% Strengths: The workshop model provides a better way to differentiate instruction since the range of abilities in most classrooms is significant. It allows teachers to demonstrate (‘to’) the whole group, work through an example in pairs and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  feedback to the class to ascertain the gaps in understanding of the concept and/or task (with), and plan accordingly. We have piloted engage NY in certain upper grade classes to raise the rigor of our teaching practices. Rather than taking a gender approach to creating classes we try to ensure that our classes are parallel with care being taken to provide a balanced and socially cohesive class makeup. For instance, where students with behavioral challenges are not all in the one class. We continue to use outsider organizations and consultants. For example, we used CEI for walkthroughs and have a Teaching Matters consultant and a Teaching Matters consultant who provides professional development. At the same time, we have implemented schoolwide teams, acknowledging the experience and talents some of our teachers demonstrate. We have found a team approach promotes buy-in and development of leadership so that each team is responsible for some aspect of our education goals. We send representatives to off-campus PD and require them to turn-key the information with their grade team on their return and this proves useful when the required curriculum is being presented by district DOE facilitators or DOE approved facilitators. As an example we are in the 3rd year of the Teacher Round Initiative and our K/1 and 4/5 teacher teams will collaborate with teachers in schools beginning in their 1year of the initiative. Additionally, this year we sent the Teacher Rounds team to Harvard for training in the transformation of teacher teams. As we did not meet our benchmark for SWD. We needed to rethink our instructional program for this target group and researched successful practices in other schools. We collect a wide range of student data, such as pre and post, baseline and endline and other formative assessments in math and literacy particularly I-Ready, Running Records Reading Assessment. These are in place to support teacher and teacher teams to modify and target specific areas of need across the grade, the class and for individuals. We are currently working on using the formative assessment information to provide timely and actionable feedback to individuals and groups of students in order to help them to identify their strengths and weaknesses towards learning goals. Our major summative assessment is the end instructional unit to ascertain student learning as well as the high stakes state tests and NYSESLAT (used to determine if an ELL has achieved English Language proficiency) and we analyze yearly growth. We are working on making effective and timely use of the item analysis provided by NYS to help us pinpoint standards that we need to focus on as a school and grade. Challenges: It must be noted that of the majority of our 648 students in Grades 3 to 5 are Hispanic (486) and in the surrounding community Spanish is a dominant language spoken. While we collect excellent student assessment information we continue to work to upskill all of our teachers to optimize opportunities to pin point student learning needs, especially with such a high student mobility rates (only 40% of students that began in Kindergarten are still enrolled in Grade 5 in 2018. Therefore 60% of 5thgrade students are new to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  our school throughout their elementary school years), and the wide range of learning outcomes within each classroom. In 2 classes in Grade 2 for our Reading Records Benchmark, 15 students were non-readers and the rest of the class was far below grade level expectations. By contrast in another class in second grade, 5 students scored above grade level, 13 students were at grade level, 2 students were working towards grade level and 3 below grade level (2017-18 T.C. Benchmark Reading Levels). In each grade a similar range is evident, making using data based instruction timely and purposeful and leading to high level of student achievement a particular challenge that we are working to address. All grades continue to work with the RTI to further provide necessary interventions for our students. As a result of our review this goal is designed to continue to focus on deepening rigor in planning instruction by teacher teams to collaborate to ensure student progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 1: By June 2019, All teachers, will consistently employ teaching strategies that provide multiple entry points into the curricula so that all learners, including ELLs and SWDs, are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks, demonstrating higher-order thinking skills in student work products, resulting in a 4% increase in student proficiency in New York State Tests. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In reviewing student work samples and assessments grade teams and specialist teachers (such as ESL, IEP/SETTS, SPED) analyze data to identify strengths and areas for improvement. Grade teams Sept '18 to June '19 Consultants, Instructional Leaders, Coaches, Instructional Team, Grade Team Leaders Lesson planning will employ multiple entry points allowing teachers to engage all students in learning, such as: - providing purposeful and authentic open-ended explorations - creating responsive and flexible groups - engaging in accessible thinking and reasoning routines - providing access for all learners through starting points in tasks that are low floor, high ceiling - incorporating student choice and voice - considering students’ strengths and interests when designing tasks and investigations Teachers can cater to different learning styles/ needs through: Linguisitic – Reading independenty and using audio, word games, oral reports, groupwork Logicial/mathemtatical – incorporating puzzles, logic games, experiments, investigations, mystery stories/activities Visual/spatial – hands on activities, videos, highlighters, graphic organizers, outlines, calendar, pictures/graphics, diagrams Bodily/kinesthetic – hands on activities, moving around room, manipulatives, simulations, highlighters, groupwork 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  Interpersonal – groupwork, seminars, discussion activities Intrapersonal – independent study, writing activity, journal, biography Narrative – writing based on a 1sthand account (diary/biography/letter) Tiering is an instructional practice allowing students to journey toward grade-level standards. Tiered assignments are parallel tasks provided to small groups of students based on their similar levels of readiness to complete them. By creating tiered activities, teachers can ensure students get ‘just right’ work that’s challenging enough to be worthwhile but not frustrating to point of discouragement.  Strategies used will be reviewed at grade team meetings to ensure targeted students are fully engaged and able to work towards their specific learning goals. Crucial planning is underway to ensure rigor with multiple entry points: Grade teams Sept '18 to June '19 - Grade 4 and 5 will implement the Engage NY Modules that have been planned by these team members - K-3 will based their grade team plans on Teachers College units - K-5 will base their Mathematics planning on Engage NY Planning to use The 5 Practices in Math framework as basis for gradual implementation starting with our grade 5. It identifies a set of instructional practices that will help teachers achieve high-demand learning objectives by using student work as the launching point for discussions in which important mathematical ideas are brought to the surface, contradictions are exposed, and understandings are developed or consolidated. The 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions are: Anticipating likely student responses to challenging mathematical tasks. Anticipating requires that teachers do the problem as many ways as they can Monitoring students’ actual responses to the tasks (while students work on the tasks in pairs or small groups) Monitoring student responses involve paying close attention to students’ mathematical thinking and solution strategies as they work on the task. Selecting particular students to present their mathematical work during the whole-class discussion. The selection of particular students and their solutions is guided by the mathematical goal for the lesson and the teacher’s assessment of how each contribution Instructional Leaders, grade teams Teaching Matters Consultants 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  will contribute to that goal. Thus, the teacher selects certain students to present because of the mathematics in their responses Sequencing the student responses that will be displayed in a specific order. This ordering begins with the least sophisticated representation (a picture) of the least sophisticated strategy (scaling up by collecting sets) and ends with the most sophisticated strategy (scale factor), a sequencing that would help with the goal of accessibility. Working toward effective differentiation with sub groups, such as ENL students, involves planning that is based on: All teachers Sept'18-June'19 - Knowing ELLs’ strengths and weaknesses in English (based on analysis of baseline writing, reading and mathematics assessments) - lessons that aim to set a common content objective but may differentiate the language objective - ensuring differentiation is manageable for teachers, using small variations to the base activity with, for example, using content, process and/or product adaptation. - Team planning the base activity for higher level students and tier downward rather than working from the bottom up, thus ensuring rigor. - flexible grouping rather than fixed grouping, so that ELLs can have some opportunities to interact with more competent and/or native speakers - Recognition that cognitive complexity is intertwined with language proficiency – using planning tools such as Blooms’ Taxonomy to intentionally differentiate prompts and questions at different levels of cognitive complexity. Instructional Leaders, Consultants, Grade Team Leaders Instructional Leaders, grade teams Teaching Matters Consultants We will conduct PD to support grade teams to extend lessons for higher performing students. Grade teams Sept'18-June'19 As a result of PD Teams will: - determine which parts of the curriculum higher performing students have already mastered by analyzing baseline assessments and NYS Test item analysis - decide which part of the lesson higher performing students have mastered based on response to mini-lessons, independent study, previewing resources, teacher conferences, open-ended questions - plan for students who have indicated a firm understanding will complete another activity that extends what they already know 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  - make tiering invisible by informing students that each group is using different materials or completing different activities so they can share what they learned with the class. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration and Parent Coordinator will ensure that parents and families are supported in understanding the level of rigor required and provided with strategies to support their children to further progress at home, at: · Parent/Teacher Conferences (4 times in the year) · Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays . Parental Engagement Tuesday afternoon meetings- Meet with the Parent Coordinator (help with logging into the NYC schools account, Class dojo, and how to navigate the NYC Schools website. Meeting with Support staff, Guidance counselors and social workers. . Parent Support Group meeting with our social workers every last Friday of the month. . Health Fairs in March parent teacher conference. . Summer Camp Fairs are done in January in time for sign up. · Open House events, such as Meet the Teach, classroom celebrations such as publishing parties · Scheduled Curricula workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development for staff, Teaching Matters Consultant, Teacher Rounds PD (time for planning) After School and ELL targeting for literacy, PTA funded Homework Packets, per session funding for teacher teams to plan instruction to ensure CCLS alignment, Early Reading Matters Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24 We will track progress using assessments that are rigorously aligned to the Common Core. Therefore our progress monitoring will include at least a 2% improvement as shown through our: - i-ready data by student, class and grade - Analysis of overall individual and grade Baseline as compared with midline assessments - Analysis of Running Record baseline and midline. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February Benchmark Report for Goal 1: Extensive midline data is being collected and at this time we can report on the available incoming data for a lower and an upper grade Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. We are on track to meet this goal as a result of our mid year review of the relevant data as shown: I-Ready Reading – Winter 2019 Lower Grade(Grade 1) 63% Progress, 20% Met & 3% Improved, 39% Improved Placement Upper Grade(Grade 5) 76% Progress, 40% Met & 10% Improved, 46% Improved Placement I-Ready Math – Winter 2019 Lower Grade(Grade 1) 59% Progress, 23% Met & 6% Improved, 45% Improved Placement Upper Grade(Grade 5) 67% Progress, 33% Met & 7% Improved, 54% Improved Placement Running Record Kindergarten: Baseline (November) – Early Emergent Level AA 72%, Level A 20%, Level B/C 8% Midline (Jan/February) – Early Emergent Level AA 10%, Level A 31%, Level B/C 56%, Level D 3% Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Student population - 1,111 student population At this time there are 286 students registered for temporary housing, shelters, and doubled up - 96% students are eligible to receive Free Lunch - 3% students eligible for reduced cost lunch - 23.34% school population in (288 students) are classified English New Learners - 19.53% or 241 Special Education students School Survey 2017-18 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  52% parents took the School Survey (490) 99% teachers took the School Survey (93) Score 2017-18 School Quality Guide 3.25 Rigorous Instruction 3.33 Collaborative Teachers 3.30 Effective School Leadership 2.88 Strong Family Ties 3.12 Trust Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 25% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 14%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 11%  10% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  18% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  119 of Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 53 additional students  14% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 13%  20% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 8%  30% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 13%  Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 24% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 15%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 9% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  7% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  15% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 5%  26% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 10%  17% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  23% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 11%  25% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 an improvement of 8% Strengths: We have strategically organized our work with school stakeholders to support students’ social/emotional developmental health needs and remove barriers to success? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Challenges: We realize that what was needed was a whole school community plan that incorporates protocols and processes to address stakeholders’ roles in supporting all students with a diverse range of social-emotional learning skills. As a result of an analysis of our student outcomes, Survey and Quality Review data we have decided that we need a continue a deepening focus on fostering a supportive social and emotional environment within our school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 2: By June 2019, we will have conducted a comprehensive social/emotional education within the school community, resulting in an 8% reduction in incident reports & suspensions. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will explore the foundations of student’s social and emotional well-being as a starting point to working collaboratively with parents to identify issues and concerns they may have about their child or children. In working to improve student social-emotional well-being we will be paying close attention to the needs of students who have a range of disabilities, ELL students and identified high needs students. We will establish a peer mediation program with opportunities for community service, enhanced mental health services and counseling and school-wide classroom-based education on health and anti-bullying. In this we will obtain support from District PD, Chancellor’s PD, STH. Liaison, School Mental Health Consulting Program. We will continue to use a PBIS framework with core practices and systems and specific interventions, strategies, and/or curricula selected and/or developed by the implementation team. We have a PBIS team and it will continue training all school staff, including those new to the school. The presentation describes rationale, features, outcomes of PBIS, and School-wide Positive Behavior Support. It especially focuses on: · prevention · continuum of evidence-based practices, · academic-behavior link, · systems capacity · after school (we offer an enrichment program as an incentive, particularly for upper grade boys) - training for strategies to focus attention and developing coping mechanisms The SIT team will work together to develop a survey to administer to the staff to gauge whether or not we are making adequate progress towards meeting this goal. Sch. community Oct ’18-June ‘19 School Counselor team Administration Sch. community Sept '18- June '19 School Counselor team Administration School community Sept'18-June'19 School Counselor team Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  At the weekly SIT meeting we conduct an analysis of school wide incident data to determine what interventions currently being utilized need to be adjusted so that all staff and students feel safe at school We will continue with the highly successful Class DOJO Technology program (class dojo.com). Class Dojo is a classroom communication app used to share reports between parents and teachers. Teachers track student behavior and upload photos or videos. The gamification style system teaches developmental skills through real-time feedback. Therefore, Class DOJO will allow us to have a school-wide monitoring of positive behaviors based on points for different categories. Parents can access points electronically. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement School community Oct.'18-June'19 School Counselor team Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration and Parent Coordinator will ensure that parents and families are supported in understanding the level of rigor required and provided with strategies to support their children to further progress at home, at: · Parent/Teacher Conferences (4 times in the year) · Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays · Open House events, such as Meet the Teach, classroom celebrations such as publishing parties · Scheduled Curricula workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Meetings and outreach for parents as scheduled throughout the year - Data analysis of official reports and level and location of infractions - After School and Saturday Programs as announced in the Newsletters - Incentive celebrations, for example special assemblies in the auditorium - Educational incentive prizes - Gotcha cards to encourage and re-enforce positive behavior - Employment of an additional social worker Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III X X Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 4.5% reduction of monitored incident reports and suspensions, as compared with the June 2018 OORS Report by the end of January 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February Benchmark Report Goal 2 will involve scrutiny of 2018-19 of Teacher removals, Principal's Suspension 10, Superintendent's Suspension 4 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. As a result of the strategies as outlined in the action plan we are confident we will meet this goal. To date we can report only 1 Superintendent’s Suspension Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Student population - 1,111 student population At this time there are 286 students registered for temporary housing, shelters, and doubled up - 96% students are eligible to receive Free Lunch - 3% students eligible for reduced cost lunch - 23.34% school population in (350 students) are classified English New Learners - 19.53% or 241 Special Education students School Survey 2017-18 52% parents took the School Survey (490) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  99% teachers took the School Survey (93) Score 2017-18 School Quality Guide 3.25 Rigorous Instruction 3.33 Collaborative Teachers 3.30 Effective School Leadership 2.88 Strong Family Ties 3.12 Trust Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 25% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 14%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 11% Level 1 NYSELA 2017-55% and in NYSELA 2018 – 40% representing a decrease of 15%  10% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  18% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  119 of Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 53 additional students  14% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 13%  20% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 8%  30% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 13% Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 24% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 15%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 9% Level 1 NYS Math 2017-56% and in NYS Math 2018 – 40% representing a decrease of 5% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  7% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  15% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 5%  26% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 10%  17% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  23% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 11%  25% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 an improvement of 8% Strengths: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Teacher teams are developing strategies to help students know and be able to provide evidence that they have contributed to as part of the assessment criteria. As well our teacher teams are developing workable strategies and processes to allow students themselves to set goals for their individual progress. In their unit planning teacher teams plan for questions and assessments that can be used regularly to diagnose evidence of learning by every student As well our teams are working to build a repertoire of forms of feedback, from both teacher and peers, that is accurate and specific and advances learning. Teachers provide information to parents and students to ensure they are fully aware of the grade level assessment outcomes and the goals that will support improvement. Performance writing tasks are analyzed in all grades Challenges: Subgroups will require modifications to assess their progress, particularly our beginning ENLs to allow teacher teams to focus on the learning outcomes will be tracked to monitor growth toward the grade level Common Core Standards. As a result of our review this goal is designed to continue to focus on deepening rigor in planning instruction by teacher teams to collaborate to ensure student progress. Writing Assessment We conducted an analysis of the K-5 Baseline Writing outcomes and compared this with the K-5 End-line Writing Outcomes and found a wide variety in the instructional approach. As writing represents thinking and writing in English poses a significant challenge for our Spanish speaking students in particular, in 2017-18 we will focus on promoting student achievement in writing through a coherent and explicit instructional approach. It is through the writing process that we aim to encourage students to sharpen both in their thinking and their reading skills, as well as their writing. The majority of our 648 students in Grades 3 to 5 are Hispanic (486) and in the surrounding community Spanish is a dominant language spoken. As a result of our review this goal is designed to continue to focus on deepening rigor in planning instruction by teacher teams to collaborate to ensure student progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 3: By June 2019, Teacher teams, including new and new to the grade teachers, will consistently analyze assessment data and student work for students they share, focused on improved teacher practice, and progress toward goals for groups of students, resulting in a 4% increase in student proficiency in New York State Tests. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. All Teacher teams will review NYS Test data (growth by All teachers Sept.‘18- Administrators, grade by class by individuals) and examine Item analysis and note items of concern 2. Conduct school-wide P.D. to thoroughly review Danielson Rubric 3d, Using Assessment in Instruction 3. Assessment that supports instruction will be in a variety of forms and the P.D. will cover three main types: - pre-assessment (baselines in reading, writing and mathematics) MOSL writing task to ensure we norm on the same rubric 4. formative assessment (conducted during the lesson or unit to gather information about student assessment 5. summative assessment (assessments that shows what students have learned) June '19 Grade leaders All teams 1. All teachers will conduct Data-Driven Instruction & Assessment K-5 All teachers Sept'18- June'19 Instructional leaders, Grade team leaders 2. Assessment practices for all grade teams involve a careful norming process to ensure coherence within each grade and continuity from grade to grade as well as to ensure Standards alignment 3. Examination of the resulting assessment focuses each team on the Gap Analysis so that interventions will be aligned to grade level standards We will conduct: - Writing task for MOSEL we will norm on the same rubric in writing - Teachers College R/W units Kindergarten – Gr. 3 - Engage NY modules Gr. 4-5 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  - Fundations probe to assess early skills - I-Ready Assessments in a formal whole-class setting - September – June K and 1 will institute a 35 minute targeted reading block - K-2 will administer Baseline and Endline Writing Assessments in September and May to support differentiated and targeted instruction with for the full range of achievement including struggling learners, ELLs, and extension work for those achieving at or above grade level - Engage NY Mathematics in K- 3. Subgroups may require modifications to assess their progress, particularly our beginning ENLs and the learning outcomes will be tracked to monitor growth toward the grade level Common Core Standards. 1. Teacher teams will develop strategies to help students know and be able to provide evidence that they have contributed to as part of the assessment criteria 2. Teachers teams will develop workable strategies and processes to allow students themselves to set goals for their individual progress 3. In their unit planning teacher teams will ensure there are questions and assessments that can be used regularly to diagnose evidence of learning by every student 4. Teams will build a repertoire of forms of feedback, from both teacher and peers, that is accurate and specific and advances learning 5. Teachers will ensure parents and students are fully aware of the grade level assessment outcomes and the goals that will support improvement 6. Unit assessments will be ongoing in ELA and Math 7. TC Running Records conducted K-3 8. Grade teams review the results and plan instruction based on this assessment information 9. I-Ready conducted at regular intervals from September 2017 to June 2018 10. Teams devise action plans for Test Prep based on all available student assessment information All teachers Sept'18- June'19 Instructional leaders, Grade team leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  1. Teacher Rounds Initiative – PS70 is an Expert School with All teachers four teachers and our principal participating in an extension course at Harvard Course during Summer break Sept’18- June ‘19 Instructional leaders, Grade team leaders, Parent Coordinator 2. Teacher Rounds Initiative is a process that school districts and schools use to better understand teaching and learning in schools in order to improve learning at scale. In an instructional rounds session, a group of teachers makes a series of visits to classrooms to observe what is taking place in the instructional core (the interactions between students and teachers in the presence of content). Low inference observation notes are taken about a learning problem identified by the school being observed. The observation notes are used to create a picture of what has been seen in teaching and learning practices throughout the school. It is these practices that are shared with the school, not information about individual teachers or students. The aim of is to observe teaching and learning to discern root causes for problems identified by the school and to help the school create more productive outcomes. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration and Parent Coordinator will ensure that parents and families are supported in understanding the grade level assessment outcomes and goals, the level of rigor required and strategies to support their children to further progress at home, at: · Parent/Teacher Conferences (4 times in the year) · Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays · Open House events, such as Meet the Teach, classroom celebrations such as publishing parties Scheduled Curricula workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Consultancy, per session for planning, TC Units of Study (Literacy), Guided Reading resources, Intervention kits, Core Curriculum, Assessments (i-Ready) Per Session funding for teachers for after school planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -As a result of our structures and planning, we will have established coherence across grades and subjects as we promote college and career readiness and routinely require all students to demonstrate their thinking. -Teacher teams will monitor in school and standardized assessment data (units & mid unit tests, writing assignments, running records, I-Ready in ELA, Writing and I-Ready for Math) as a midyear benchmark and will determine the next steps for June 2018 This will be measured by an increase of the Fountas and Pinnell levels by at least 2 levels across the grades and across the board improvement of student writing as measured by achievement in 75% of the components of the rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February Benchmark Report for Goal 3: Extensive midline data is being collected and at this time we can report on the available incoming data for a lower and an upper grade. 1. Analysis of Kindergarten Independent Reading data will reveal the percentage of students 'At' or 'Above' the January Teacher College Benchmark for Kindergarten of Level B/C 2. Analysis of Grade 4 Reading data reveals an average gain from fall to winter 3. Analysis of Grade 4 Mathematics i-Ready data in Fall and again in Winter with an average gain overall Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Running Record Kindergarten: Baseline (November) – Early Emergent Level AA 72%, Level A 20%, Level B/C 8% Midline (Jan/February) – Early Emergent Level AA 10%, Level A 31%, Level B/C 56%, Level D 3% I-Ready Reading – Winter 2019 Grade 4 - 63% Progress, 33% Met & 8% Improved, 33% Improved Placement I-Ready Math – Winter 2019 Grade 4 - 63% Progress, 30% Met & 4% Improved, 60% Improved Placement As result of tracking student growth according to who the teacher taught we have made some internal changes based on the data and collapsed 504. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Student population - 1,111 student population At this time there are 286 students registered for temporary housing, shelters, and doubled up - 96% students are eligible to receive Free Lunch - 3% students eligible for reduced cost lunch - 23.34% school population in (288 students) are classified English New Learners - 19.53% or 241 Special Education students School Survey 2017 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  - 386 parents took the School Survey - 77 teachers took the School Survey School Survey 2017-18 52% parents took the School Survey (490) 99% teachers took the School Survey (93) Score 2017-18 School Quality Guide 3.25 Rigorous Instruction 3.33 Collaborative Teachers 3.30 Effective School Leadership 2.88 Strong Family Ties 3.12 Trust Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 25% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 14%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 11%  10% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  18% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  119 of Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 53 additional students  14% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 13%  20% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 8%  30% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 13% Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 24% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 15%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 9% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  7% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  15% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 5%  26% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 10%  17% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9% 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  23% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 11%  25% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 an improvement of 8% Strengths: Grade teams have been devising divergent as well as convergent questions designed to encourage students to make connections and challenge previously held views, supported by Teaching Matters Consultancy and a focus on small group guided reading in ELA. Coaches, supervisors and consultants provide in-class support, coaching, mentoring and inter-visitation in order to gain insight into how appropriately pitched and challenging discussion questions can advance high-level thinking and rigor. Additionally, we are developing a series of moves that fully encourage student participation, by valuing responses and fostering wider participation in the discussion Challenges: We will be empowering teachers to team teach working to conduct agreed strategies and practices working with research- based/evidence based as defined by analysis of student achievement data and the Common Core Standards in content area subjects and the updated Danielson Rubric, the Quality Teaching for English Learners (QTEL), Teaching Matters and the Universal Literacy Program. Each grade team will work on revising and refining their instructional programs as relevant. Also our teacher teams and grade teams are empowered to review, define and record successful strategies that are deemed supportive for our students. Their findings will need to be integrated into unit and lesson plans Close attention should be paid to scaffolding ENL learners and those students with an IEP during grade team meetings to ensure we have tiered tasks devised. The scaffolding strategies will be advised by the Fordham University, ENL consultancy and Quality Teaching for English Learners (QTEL). As a result of our review this goal is designed to continue to focus on deepening rigor in planning instruction by teacher teams to collaborate to ensure student progress. Having evaluated the effectiveness of the school- level decisions, adjustments will be made to our goal and action plans, to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, with particular attention on the alignment of our instructional planning and implementation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 4: By June 2019, the majority of teachers will be engaged in structured, inquiry-based professional collaborations that promotes the achievement of school goals and the implementation of NYS Standards, strengthening the instructional capacity of teachers, resulting in a 4% increase in student proficiency in New York State Tests. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers Sept.'18-Nov.'19 Instructional Leaders Administrators  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. To nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, develop and deliver the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement the Principal has attended the 2-day Citywide Principal Professional Development in the Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric (MPPR). It supports the use of 2015 Professional Standards for Educational Leaders including five dimensions (culture, sustainability, instructional program, capacity building and strategic planning process) along with scaffolded goal setting and attainment through action planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation processes. 2. Planning toward implementation of the MPPR process includes a focus on: - our teacher teams will work toward refining our ELA and Mathematics curricula and practice - tracking progress by monitoring communication artifacts, recording how and when meeting to inform stakeholders, including families and students - best practice development for deeply engaging students in math, using 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  observation cycles, teacher rounds, instructional rounds, professional development cycles to ensure that math is present and a focus across the school - delineating clear data points and structures to ensure the shift in curriculum is strategic and has positive outcomes for students with teacher teams engaging in Problems of Practice aligned to this work. In support of the learning needs of our students we have: All teachers Nov.'18-June.'19 Instructional Leaders Administrators - A newly appointed Assistant Principal who will conduct PD in all aspects of the Danielson Framework and the 5 Practices in Mathematics - A Teaching Matters Coach who will support K-2 small group Guided Reading - Universal Literacy Coach who will provide focused support for K-2 - Teacher teams are disaggregating and focusing on data for our Level 1 students and our subgroups, specifically in K-2 Push in support for struggling students - Structured a Prep period each day to allow our teacher teams to meet and also 3rdgrade has a 7thperiod prep - Implemented an Enrichment Program for all students that includes homework for 30 minutes and a schedule of activities, such as student council, running club, basketball and MIDORI will provide Music Choir - Leveled Library (LLI) Intervention Program, featuring scripted vocabulary to improve the learning outcomes our targeted students (ELL, SWD) - Passport Social Studies is purchased to support the integration of S.S. into Engage NY - Scheduled our Instructional Specialists to spend half week in the classroom and half the week coaching teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Our PD Schedule includes: All teachers - 2017-18 Danielson data will be examined & analyzed, by teacher by Domain - As a result a Differentiated Professional Development Plan drawn up by Administration to address professional learning needs - Working with the Danielson rubric, particularly Domain 3, Instruction, to develop norms for each indicator - All teachers receive overall Danielson data & goal set based on their specific learning needs - Teachers with ‘Developing’ ratings in Domain 3 selected for targeted support - Tracking spreadsheet devised for targeted teachers over 4-6 observations - Regular meeting with supervisor to track progress toward their professional learning goal in-school inter-visitations will be scheduled to PS204 and PS63 with specific focus for targeted teachers All teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept'18-June ‘19 Sept‘18- June ‘19 Instructional Leaders Administrators How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Inform our school community on the measures being undertaken to ensure improved instruction and disseminating information on the Danielson Rubric Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Out of class for intra- and inter visitations -PD involving resources/materials 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  - Purchase LLI - Literacy Leveled Intervention Program for SWD - Coverage’s for mentoring, as required - Supervisor’s scheduling of observations to ensure targeting of all teacher - Scheduling for 1:1 timely & actionable feedback - Time scheduled for in class support and planning for teachers, as required - Schedule weekly grade team meeting to review student work, to support gaps in understanding teaching practices - Consultancy support - Per session funding for planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February Benchmark Report for Goal 4: Extensive midline data is being collected and at this time we can report on the available incoming data for a lower and an upper grade. 1. Analysis of Kindergarten Independent Reading data will reveal the percentage of students 'At' or 'Above' the January Teachers College Benchmark for Kindergarten of Level B/C 2. Analysis of Grade 4 Reading data reveals an average gain from fall to winter 3. Analysis of Grade 4 Mathematics i-Ready data in Fall and again in Winter with an average gain overall Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress Kindergarten Independent Reading Data TC Level 1 Below (Early Emergent) -72% TC Level 2 (Working Towards) - 18% TC Level 3 (At) - 10% I-Ready Reading – Winter 2019 Grade 4 - 63% Progress, 33% Met & 8% Improved, 33% Improved Placement I-Ready Math – Winter 2019 Grade 4 - 63% Progress, 30% Met & 4% Improved, 60% Improved Placement 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. - Independent Reading data using Teachers College Benchmark for each grade - Reading i-Ready - Mathematics i-Ready Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X x X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Student population - 1,111 student population At this time there are 286 students registered for temporary housing, shelters, and doubled up - 96% students are eligible to receive Free Lunch - 3% students eligible for reduced cost lunch - 23.34% school population in (288 students) are classified English New Learners - 19.53% or 241 Special Education students School Survey 2017-18 52% parents took the School Survey (490) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  99% teachers took the School Survey (93) Score 2017-18 School Quality Guide 3.25 Rigorous Instruction 3.33 Collaborative Teachers 3.30 Effective School Leadership 2.88 Strong Family Ties 3.12 Trust Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 25% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 14%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 11%  10% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  18% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  119 of Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 53 additional students  14% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 13%  20% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 8%  30% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 13% Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 24% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 15%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 9% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  7% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  15% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 5%  26% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 10%  17% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  23% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 11%  25% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 an improvement of 8% Strengths: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  We do address these barriers in the following ways, we have:  - a school 2017-18 Goal (2) is that all students will participate in comprehensive social/emotional education - an active PBIS Team that focuses on prevention, the academic behavior link, and working to ensure our practices are evidence-based - continuous training for all new teachers on the School Wide Positive Behavior Support & we regularly conduct education programs for members of the community to learn about the core practices and systems, including specific interventions, strategies and supportive curricula - a School-wide Class DOJO utilizes technology to monitor positive behaviors  - a particular attention to the social-emotional well-being of needs of ENL and identified high needs students - instituted a peer mediation program with opportunities for community service, enhanced mental health services and counselling - an emphasis on anti-bullying supported by the DOE - worked closely with School Mental Health Consulting Program, District PD, Chancellors PD, STH Liaison - Weekly SIT conducts analysis of school wide incident data to monitor and determine what interventions currently being utilized need to be adjusted so that all staff and students feel safe at school - an active School Counselor Team that uses updated survey information to guage whether or not we are making adequate progress towards meeting our goal in 2018-19 - a greater emphasis on open communication with parents/guardians and providing forums to hear a variety of opinions, suggestions and point of views. Challenges: While we set up a variety of communication avenues for parents, with translations, as well as parent teacher conferences to provide feedback on student acheivement/next steps, open invitations to school celebrations, school and grade assemblies and performances, presentation from curriculum experts on curriculum, we have yet to foster clear avenues for reciprocal communication with the goal to exchange information that would benefit student growth. Having evaluated student learning outcomes and the level of parental involvement in our school community and we realize we need to focus on further developing our home school links to support the education endeavor. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 5: By June 2019, there will be increased parental involvement & engagement at all major school open house events, resulting in an additional 5% attendance, as measured by attendance data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 1. Promote and support parental and family involvement and invest in activities and strategies that foster parent and school collaboration All Families Sept.'18-June'19 Instructional Leaders, Parent Coordinator Teachers Communication between home and school is regular, two-way, and meaningful. Parent Workshops will be held to give Parents/guardian information as to support improved learning outcomes for their child. 2. All families will receive assessment information at regular intervals throughout the school year on: - School-wide programs and plans - School level accountability data - Curricula expectations and instructional programs - What grade level Common Core Standards look like in practice - Ways to support their child at home - Open sharing of information during discussion forums to hear parent’s opinions - Suggestions information on complaint procedures. Such information sharing will be made available during: - Parent Teacher Conferences - Tuesday Parent Engagement time - PTA meetings 3. We will ensure that all students aware of their achievements in their subjects and complete all class and set homework and we make particular efforts to maintain contact to deliver specific 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  strategies to address with parents the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups 4. School Decision-Making and Advocacy – parents are full partners in the decisions that affect children and families. The intent is to give parents voice in decisions that affect their children’s education through, for example, involvement on the SLT and PTA. The Parent Coordinator will provide translations for all communications to be sent home/or as required. 5. Volunteering,parents are welcome in the school, and their support and assistance is encouraged. 1. Collaboration with the Community, resources are used to strengthen schools, families, and student learning. We work closely with CBO’s including Midori Centre. All Families Instructional Leaders Parent Coordinator Sept.'18- June'19 2. Parent Point System is used to support this goal and be implemented by the Parent Coordinator. She plans schedules and widely advertises inside and outside the school for the School Messenger Parent Workshops. She conducts each workshop, with the assistance of Instructional Leaders, as appropriate. 3. During Parent Teacher Conferences and Tuesday Parent Engagement time, parents/guardian are provided with information as to how they can support their child's improved learning outcomes in meeting and exceeding the state standards. There will also be time for parents and families to offer other support for the school or the class as their skills and experience is valued at our school. 1. Parenting skills are promoted and supported Sept.'18- June'18 2. Parent Coordinator plans, schedules and widely advertises Parent Workshops. She conducts each workshop, with the assistance of Instructional Leaders, as appropriate. Some of the topics on the Parental Engagement 2018-19 scheduled include: All Families Instructional Leaders, Parent Coordinator All Teachers -Kindergarten at its Best -Let’s Peek into 1st Grade -Healthy Start to Our New School Year -Grade 2 Full Speed Ahead, -Pushing the Limits in Grade 3 -Pulling out all the Stops in 4thGrade -Soaring to New Heights in 5thGrade 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  -Bilingual/ENL -Dual Language -Preparation for Fourth Grade Science Exam -Preparation for Grades 3-5 NYSELA and Math Tests -S.T.E.M Fair -Spirit Day 1. Open house welcoming parents with well planned activities for parent/child that help break down barriers and reluctance to enter the school building All Families Sept’18- June’19 Parent Coordinator, Administration, Teachers Parents are invited to and have been a part of a multitude of school-wide events such as Literacy Fair, Saturday Academy, athletic activities, awards ceremony, monthly parent workshops and breakfasts as well as monthly assemblies and our spelling bee. 2. Regular publishing parties will be instituted, encouraging parents and community members to hear and interact with their children in the classroom setting. 3. Assemblies for special events, such as awards, holidays and athletic activities, will be planned for and implemented to promote home/school communication and increased parent engagement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Administration and Parent Coordinator will widely promote District wide events and opportunities for families to engage in learning strategies which can support the social emotional development of habits of mind leading to college and career readiness. Work to extend our reach within the community particularly CBO’s. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Parent Coordinator - Outreach in English and Spanish - Materials for parent workshops - Material/resources to communicate instructional goals for the year and understanding of discipline structures, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  - Specific resources for regular updates on open house and parent teacher meetings - ENL classes for parents Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - SLT Meetings - Parent Coordinator distributes information translated into Spanish - Regular monthly PTA meetings with presentations on aspects of the curricular - Open House providing specific information, showcasing student work and achievements, and answering questions to help parents provide support at home - Progress Reports and regular Parent/Teacher Conferences - Parent/teacher interview as required - School Survey Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February Benchmark Report for Goal 5: - Our Parent Coordinator maintains records of agendas - We have invited an outside PD Agency (CEI) to provide PD for our parents on reading with their children and test prep strategies. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. - Our Parent Coordinator maintains records of agendas and reports that there has been a 2.5% increase in parental and community attendance at functions -We have seen an increase in the number of parents meetings with teachers during parent-engagement time. - We have invited an outside PD Agency (CEI) to provide PD for our parents on reading with their children and test prep strategies. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Push in/Pull out (3-5) – small groups Extended small groups Grades 3-5 – F&P reading levels and I Ready lowest 1/3 of each class Small groups Small groups learning Time Academy(K-2) Saturday Academy ELA Academy –(3-5) ELL Academy Every day- during school day Every day- during school hours Afterschool (Wed. &Thurs.) Saturday 8-12 Afterschool (Wed. & Thurs.) Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Fundation scores (k-2) Lowest 1/3 of each class is chosen for AIS Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Early intervention (K-2) - Small groups Small groups Afterschool (Fridays) Small groups Achieve 3000 Mathematics Lowest 1/3 of each class based on I Ready (3-5 Math Afterschool Program Small group Small group Saturday Academy Science Social Studies Afterschool (Wed. & Thurs Afterschool (Wed. & Thurs Small group Afterschool (Wed. & Thurs.) Afterschool (Wed. & Thurs.) Small Group At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Students who have been referred by teachers, Guidance Program Academic, socio emotional whole/small group and one to one Everyday during the day and afterschool Wed. Thurs. Afterschool (Wed. & Thurs.) Saturday 8-12 Afterschool (Wed. & Thurs.) Afterschool (Wed. & Thurs.) During the day During the day 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) administrators and the RTI team behavior/therapeutic intervention and counseling small group and one to one Afterschool (Wed. & Thurs.) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 325 students including 88 sheltered, 41 temporary and 196 double up 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide school supplies, including uniforms, folders, pencils, books, book bags etc Educational supplies, including fiction and non fiction books and novels Emergency clothing is supplied to students as necessary Ensure all notifications by student and/or family members are handled with due diligence and care and referrals are made, as deemed appropriate for Individual and family counselling support and intervention programs are established or accessed to ensure that members of this population have full access to reliable and regular services. Maintain contact with Liaison professional at the local shelter that houses 25% of our students in shelters We will establish a Mobility Team to track the movement of our students in an out of shelters and they provides insights into the needs of these students. This research information will support our professional development with teachers to help us understand the conditions shelter students contend with. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Attended District 9 Fair 2. Attended a New Teacher Fair to recruit teachers new to DOE 3. New teachers are recruited through the DOE Teacher Finder Service 4. We have measures to ensure that prospective teachers have current teacher certification 5. Applicants must submit to an interview with Instructional supervisors 6. The second stage of the interview process involves a demonstration lesson 7. New teachers are mentored by coaches, grade team leaders administrators and consultants and are assigned to a 1:1 trained New Teacher mentor 8. Teachers are given the opportunity to develop a buddy system and participate in targeted PD and teacher teams to learn and observe best practices. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). - Because of the size of our teaching staff and the wide variety of experience levels we ensure Professional Development is differentiated and that teachers have the opportunity to select within a range of choices PD that will support their stated professional learning goals. - New Teacher Center - setting up new teachers for success based on training a number of teachers who receive training through the New Teacher Mentoring program -Our school provides a variety of skilled presenters to guide and mentor teachers in the areas of need that they have identified (survey), including:  Consultant from Fordham University-Start of Dual Language program in K and 1 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60 In house coaches - support team meetings and provide individual coaching as required Learning Matters Consultant - working on improving student feedback in writing to support struggling writers    Administrators - oversee all instruction, provide timely and actionable feedback, monitor student outcomes including our student subgroups  PLC - teacher teams and PD is planned, conducted and outcomes are monitored to adjust our PD plan Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). In order to assist preschool children who are transitioning from early childhood programs to elementary school we: - conduct Inter visitation to our school whereby children are involved in specifically designed activities to engage them in the processes of the school (snack time, story time, art activities and walking around the school - distribute welcome packets to parents - conduct parent meeting and orientation to the school, the goals, procedures and expectations - engage in pre-assessment of students 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  1. Professional development team formulated a needs assessment survey to implement school wide professional development. 2. Teacher teams formulated multiple assessment measures in literacy and math and developed a pacing calendar for each grade with pre & post assessments to determine student progress. 3. Teacher teams provided support in the implementation of the baseline, end line and unit assessment tasks 4. 15 teams of teachers are formed to develop action plans to address some component of our school's needs, e.g., Professional Development team consists of 8 staff members who collaboratively plan and develop our PD. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) 1,247,467 0 186,164 X 0 X Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Column B Section Reference(s) 5A-5E 0 5A-5E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 46,284 0 7,654,825 0 X X x Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 5A-5E X 5A-5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X070, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 09X070 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, School Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X070, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our goal for our new ELL students is to provide them with necessary language background experience while also strengthening their foundational reading, writing, listening,and speaking skills. We service students in grade 2-5. Our Project Learn All-Stars After school program begins in October 2018 and will last until the end of May 2019 on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, from 2:30 - 4:00 pm. Additionally, we will conduct an an ELL Spring Academy during the break. Our subgroups are Entering and Emerging for our Friday New Comer After-school Academy. Transitioning and Expanding for our ENL Project Learn All-Stars and Expanding and Commanding for our Saturday Academy. The language of instruction is English with native language support for all programs. We have now added an additional 2nd grade to our Dual Language program beginning in September 2018. We now offer K- 2nd grade Dual Language classes. We have 8 certified teachers ranging from a Bilingual license, ESL license, and Common Branch licenses. In addition to that we have our ELL Spring Academy. The ELL Spring Academy is for all students who received a 2 or 3 on the ELA and Math exam last year. The flow of the day consist of taking a practice ELA or Math test. Read aloud answers/findings, short response essays aligned with a rubric, and finally sharing responses and strategies. The Spring Academy will be operational during the Spring Break for 3 days, (Tuesday through Thursday), from 8:30 - 12:00 p.m. ENL methodologies are infused into this program. Some age and level appropriate instructional materials will be used to support this program are Continental "Reading for Comprehension, Getting Ready for NYSESLAT and Beyond, Starfall, and content area materials such as Fountas and Pinnel leveled readers, (no cost) internet and newspaper articles, document based questions, visuals, realia, total physical response activities (no cost), as well as hands on approaches to support content and academic vocabulary will be used to support our ELL population. Reading for Comprehension, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT , Smart Start, and Reading NY CCLS workbooks are at cost and purchased through the school with Title 3 funds. These materials are supplemental and distinct from that which will be used for regular instruction. Starfall and Brain Pop are at no cost to the school, teachers purchase these resources in collaboration with other teachers on their own. Our rational for these programs is based on the premise that language acquisition is acquired for all our Ell students. The ENL teachers utilize ENL instructional strategies to deliver small group instruction. Scaffolding is an essential part of the instructional delivery, ENL strategies include but are not limited to TPR, songs, repetition, graphic organizers, modeling, charts, interactive read, read aloud, retelling, thematic units, language experience approach, technology through the use of SMART Boards as well as accountable talk. Both the Balanced Literacy Model and Everyday Math Curriculum support differentiated instruction in targeting ELL students. Based on our performance data on our ELL population needs to work on their academic language skills along with the writing component from the NYSESLAT. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Our Project Learn All-Stars After school will begin October 3, 2018 and end May 16, 2019 between the hours of 2:30 - 4:00 p.m. every Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, for approximately 64 sessions. Three ENL and three content teachers will be the service providers. Our ELL Spring Academy will be a total of 3 sessions (4/23/19 - 4/25/19) from 8:30 am - 12:30 p.m.. There will be three content teachers and one ENL as service providers. Attendance and student's progress assessment documentation will be monitored and kept on file. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In addition to receiving a grant for Smartboards, we have also purchased MyOn, I-Ready and Rosetta Stone for our Ells. Monthly professional development will be implemented to provide our teachers with training and additional support for Achieve 3000. We have a representative come to support and provide on-going professional development for our teachers using the programs. We also send our ENL coordinator (Ms. Silva) ) to the monthly Borough Field Support Center meetings for ENL training, SIOP training and academic strategies for English Language Learners. Our ENL coordinator turnkeys information presented at the monthly Bronx Field Support Center meeting during our PD sessions on Mondays'. We also have Roser Salavert from RBERN /Fordham University provide professional development and support pertaining to data for our ENL and Bilingual teachers and newly formulated Kindergarden Dual Language Program.. Rational for ongoing professional development P.S. 70 has a substantial ELL population alignment with the blueprint for the education on ELL's the school is conducting ongoing PD to insure that all teachers learn strategies for ELL education. The school ELL coordinator attends monthly Bronx Borough meetings and turnkeys this PD at the school. Teachers attend RBERN PD activities on such topics as Co-Teaching, SIFE, Special education for ELL students. CR Part 154, QTEL, literacy instruction for ELLS. The school has purchased the services of Smart Star Education who will provide targeted and ongoing professional development to staff members in ELL education. This professional development is being provided to bolster the skills of all teachers who work with ELL students. There are 4 teachers working in the Title 3 program, Project Learn All-Stars ENL Program. These 4 teachers participate in all PD activities targeted for ELL"S as described above. Other staff members participate in PD activities for ELL's and therefore are able to apply appropriate skills in their classrooms. PD activities occur weekly on Monday afternoons throughout the school year. Each session is from 2::20 - 3:40 p.m. and includes such topics as, Co teaching, Scaffolding Strategies, Smart Star, RBERN turnkey Sessions, SIOP Model, Teaching Matters, Building academic vocabulary, cultural competency Fontas & Pinnel Leveling. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  Part C: Professional Development Smart Star Education is funded by the program all other professional development activities occur at no cost to the program. The schools PD program provides all teachers with explicit strategies for instructing ELL's. All teachers will continue to be trained in understanding the levels of proficiency of each of their students. All teachers will apply this understanding to the differentiation of instructional strategies in their classroom. The school has developed a plan to implement an effective co-teaching model in which both classrooms and ENL teachers share their expertise to effect the progress of ELL's. Additionally, support staff such as guidance counselors, social workers, school psychologist will be included in all training activities related to the ELL population. This will positively impact outcomes of ELL's as well. All records of professional development activities are maintained in the main office. This includes all agendas and attendance sheets of participants. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: P.S. 70 is providing an increased amount of parent meetings. Our parent coordinator Brenda Colon and parent association President Jose Otero provide meetings and workshops for our parents. Parents are notified via parent newsletters, calendars, phone system, letters home, and verbal reminders from our parent coordinator. Parent needs are based on formal and informal conversations. They are also based on our yearly parent survey. A need for our parents is to have an English as a Second Language Program. We plan to create an Immigration discussion/workshop as well. This will provide our parents with the skills necessary to improve the communication between school and home as well as provide support for parents seeking citizenship. Our goal is to have parents feel comfortable enough to participate throughout the year in decision making and other activities that will support their child's learning such as school trips, celebrations, classroom helpers, etc. Parents provide valuable information about their children, their background, strengths, weaknesses, behavior and academic work as well as their social-economic situation. Through improving communication with our parents we can work closely with them to improve our student academic achievement gaps. In this way, we can focus on Core Curriculum. We have also started "Social Friday's" this is when parents can come to the school and speak with their child's teacher. At this time we are not affiliated with any community based organizations. However, we plan to continue our Saturday program for parents who are in need of learning English. This program will run for 6 weeks every Saturday from 8:30 - 11:30 a.m. Our certified teacher Ms. C. Williams will be the facilitator. The majority of our ELL students and their parents/guardians are Spanish speaking. All notifications of events, school report cards, notification of open parent night etc. are provided in Spanish. Additionally our parent coordinator is Spanish speaking and both our bilingual and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities ENL coordinators are Spanish speaking. We have a large number of classroom teachers who are also Spanish speaking. The school has a small number of ELL students who speak Bengali, Arabic, and African dialects. The school stays in contact with the language RBERN at Fordham University and the DOE to assist us in providing translation services for these groups. Official documents like the HLIS are provided in Spanish, Bengali, and Arabic. Bengali and Spanish speaking parents view the parent orientation video in their home language. There is also a parent hot line in multiple languages to which we refer parents. Our parent workshop schedule is the following: Sept. - Kindergarden Orientation 8/31/18 8:30-9:30 a.m. 9/15/18 - Townhall Meeting 9:00 -10:30 , Back to School Night September 13, 2018 4:30-7:00 Parental Engagement Tuesdays' 2:30 - 3:35 p.m. October - 10/16/18 Breast Cancer/Domestic Violence 9:00 a.m.- 10:00 10/18 - Introduction to NYC Schools Account& NYC DOE Website 2:30 - 3:35 10/29 - Parental Support Group with Social Workers & Guidance Counselors 8:30 Nov 15 - Kindergarden at its Best 2:30-3:35 December - Physical Education/Health 2:30 - 3:35 Dec. 13 - Understanding the IEP Process 2:30 - 3:35 January - "On the Road to the Seal of Biliteracy" 8:30-9:30 February-ELA/Math Preparation Workshop 9:00 - 10:00 March - Meeting Cluster Teachers and Understanding their Curriculum 2:30-3:35 April- Preparing Students for the NYSESLAT 9:00 - 10:00 May - Mothers Day Craft 9:00 - 10:00 June - Summer Reading with Learning Leaders/ Father's Day Craft Shop 9:00 - 10:00 All records of parental engagement are maintained in the Main Office as well as the Parent Coordinators office. The binder includes agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations in parents' preferred language. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 77  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Max Schoenfeld Borough Bronx School Number 070 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kerry Castellano Coach Tanya Ballard ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michele Silva Teacher/Subject Area Rosa Beaton Teacher/Subject Area Courtney Williams Related-Service Provider Christine Rosado Superintendent Leticia Rosario Assistant Principal Kimberly Fisher Coach Zulma Bermudez School Counselor Cynthia Torres Parent Erica Lee Parent Coordinator Analise Cruz Field Support Center Staff Member Dr. Roser Salavert Other (Name and Title) Silkia Melendez Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 8 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 6 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 7 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1363 2018-19 SCEP-FF 78 Total number of ELLs 363 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.63%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 1 4 1 3 1 2016-19 1 2 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 2 3 1 1 1 5 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 6 0 0 4 0 0 10 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use I-Ready, WRAPS , baselines, and Fountas and Pinnell reading levels to assess early literacy skills. We use this data to form grouping and to differentiate instruction within the classroom. Attached is an ELA, Math, and Science graph to provide quantitative data for our Ell population. ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS ACHIEVEMENTS LEVELS FOR 2016 - 2017 NYS ELA Grade Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3,4,5 374 163 46 7 ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS ACHIEVEMENTS LEVELS FOR 2016- 2017 NYS MATHEMATICS 2018-19 SCEP-FF 79  Grade Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 3,4,5 351 176 68 25 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? After we have identified students for additional support through the EDAT tool we set up AIS, afterschool, saturday programs and 360 minutes/2 units of integrated ENL services for our entering and emerging ELL's. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We look at NYSESLAT scores to determine when groups of children have made progress We also use the EDAT toll to break down populations and individualize specific data according to proficiency level, modality scores etc. as well as other assessments such as I-ready, WRAPS, units tests'. We monitor our Ell's in each modality to see how they are progressing throughout the year. We meet as a team to analyze data and discuss next steps for all of our students. We also utilize our resources to provide professional development for our teachers on the Common Core Curriculum. Our data shows us that our students' test out at the commanding level in the earlier grades K and 1 for 2014 we had 84 students test out in K for 2015 we had 117 students test out. 1 st grade for 2014 was 22 1 st grade 2015 37. Therefore, the majority of our students are becoming proficient in the earlier grades. Our numbers are not as high as students move from 2nd to 5 th grade. However, based on the fact that 2015 was a new test even our upper grades did fairly well with a difference of only 16 students less than 2014 who tested at the commanding level. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data through EDAT Tool, NYSESLAT, ELPC, and BNDC has been gathered, we set up our afterschool, AIS, saturday programs and 360 min. integrated ENL services for our entering and emerging students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] First we collect qualitative and quantitative data on ELLs’ backgrounds and educational contexts to ensure appropriateness of classroom instruction and classroom context. Then we collect data using I-Ready as a universal screener, interpret data, and determine an academic intervention plan. Tier One: Excellent Core Instruction: By analyzing assessment data teachers examine class trends to ensure that most of the needs of the student population are being met. If the data shows that the majority of the children are still working toward meeting a goal than we revisit the core instruction and make modifications for the entire class. Tier Two: Double Dose of Same Core Instruction: By analyzing classroom data teachers identify pockets of children who need another round of core curriculum instruction in a smaller group. Tier Three: Individualized Intensive Instruction: If the data shows that specific children are not making progress through Tier One or Tier Two approaches than the curriculum is adjusted in a small group setting to meet the individual needs of the student. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. In analyzing our ELL data we see one common pattern across all of the grades; the ELL students are increasing in their level of proficiency on the NYSESLAT with each grade level, but not with the ELA or the predictive assessments. The majority of our kindergarten ELL’s place at entering and/or emerging, whereas the majority of our 4th and 5th grade ELL’s place at an expanding proficiency( Edat Data Tool).. The assumption would then be made that our ELL’s would achieve a higher Tier on the ELA and/or predictive assessments. However, our data does not yield this trend. The statistics indicate our ELL students, across all of the grades, fall in the Tier 1 (2 levels below grade level) or Tier 2 (below grade level) ranges on all of the ELA and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 80  predictive assessments. The data indicates a distinct need for our ELL students. Possible theories we need to explore are: 1) the need to build up prior knowledge about a variety of non-fiction topics, 2) the need to build up tier two words for understanding and meaning of vocabulary, 3) the need to teach reading comprehension strategies and skills, and 4) the need to review similarities and differences of the formats and stylization of the assessments. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We make adjustments to our program based on findings from EDAT Tool, NYSESLAT, ELA, Math and NYSITELL,. Our Data specialist, ENL coordinator, and Bilingual coordinator meet each Monday and as needed to discuss ELL students' status according to these reports, EDAT Tool, NYSESLAT and each modality specifically. Our AIS groups are changed twice a year to ensure more students get targeted instruction within a small group setting. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) which includes ENL Self-Contained classes and Integrated ENL. All classes are grouped heterogeneously with mixed proficiency levels. The language of instruction is English. All ELL students in kindergarten/first grade and ENL Self-Contained classes in grades 3, 4 and 5 receive the integrated part of ENL instruction by ENL certified teachers as a part of their language development and daily academic instruction. In Grade K- 5 ELLs are clustered in a classroom with a certified general education teacher, and an ENL teacher classes switch the ENL teacher teaches ELA and social studies while the general ed teacher teaches math and science. These are ENL self contained classes. While an ENL certified teacher follows the Integrated ENL model. In ICT, Special Education and general education classes ELLs receive ENL instruction through the integrated model. The NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results are used to plan program instruction. Students who are at entering or emerging level receive 360 minutes a week of ENL services. All the aforementioned ENL program models help ELL students to achieve English language proficiency and attain the standards established for all students for grade promotion and graduation. All Ells receive the requisite amount of instruction in ENL based on their proficiency levels. Students receive ENL content instruction in science and social studies. The primary goal of this program is to amplify the literacy and cognitive/academic skills of all ELLs by incorporating recognized and researched based ENL instructional strategies across content subject areas so they can perform at city and state grade levels. ENL strategies include but are not limited to: scaffolding, TPR, songs and chants, repetition, graphic organizers (i.e. tables, flowcharts, graphs and story maps), modeling, interactive read alouds, retelling, sequencing, thematic units, language experience approach, academic accountable talk and use of picture dictionaries. Both the Balanced Literacy Model and Go Math support differentiated instruction to enhance the cognitive linguistic and academic growth of our ELL students. The latter participate in read alouds, independent reading, shared and guided instruction and mini-lessons. ELL students work with challenging and authentic activities that meet their unique learning styles and participate in special events that recognize the diversity of their cultural backgrounds. In addition, ENL and cluster teachers implement the sheltered English approach to deliver academic content area instructional support for the ELLs. We address the students’ different learning styles and English language modalities through the use of our computer lab and promethean white boards to meet their multisensory (i.e. visual, auditory and kinestetic) learning needs. Through Engage New York and Go Math/Reading technology based programs we also 2018-19 SCEP-FF 81  develop ELLs’ linguistic, cognitive and academic skills.1. P.S. 70 is a -K through 5th grade school which provides ENL services (Integrated /Self-Contained Programs) for our ELL population. Initially, students are identified during the school's registration process when a child enters the NYCDOE system. The Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) is administered as follows: A licensed pedagogue or the ENL teacher, help to fill out the HLIS during registration in order to identify the child's home language. There is an informal oral interview in English and in the native language, and a formal initial assessment. If the child is identified as an eligible candidate ENL instructional services after the initial screening process, the ENL teacher or Bilingual teacher administer to the child the NYSITELL within ten business days of the child's enrollment in the school. The NYSTIELL test is then hand scored to determine if the student is an English Language Learner scoring at the entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding,or commanding level, or if he/she is English Proficient (not entitled for ENL services). Formal scores are shown in the ATS system at a later time. Furthermore, if the student is an English Language Learner and speaks Spanish, the Spanish NYSTIELL is given to the student by a qualified pedagogue proficient in the language. All eligible ELL's that are identified in ATS (RLAT) are given the NYSESLAT yearly in the four modalities which are reading, speaking, writing, and listening until they test at a commanding level in which they will still be entitled for up to 2 years continued ENL service for 90 min. per week. The New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT), a test developed by the New York State Education Department to measure the English Language Arts (ELA) proficiency levels of ELLs, is administered each spring. The NYSESLAT scores are used to determine if the student is already English proficient, or if he/she is an ELL at entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding English proficiency level. Additionally, students are given periodic assessments throughout the school year to prepare them for the NYSESLAT. The results are printed from ATS in August and carefully reviewed by the administration and the ENL teacher. The students’ data which includes their proficiency levels in the 4 modalities: reading, writing, speaking and listening is used to plan the instructional goals during the coming school year. The parents of students who achieved English proficiency, therefore are no longer entitled to ENL services, receive a Non- Entitlement letter from the ENL teacher. ELL students are grouped for ENL services according to their grade and English proficiency levels on the NYSTIELL or the NYSESLAT. b. TBE program. If applicable. Our Transitional Bilingual program helps students develop English language skills. Our TBE program helps transfer literacy skills from a student's home language (Spanish) to English At the entering/emerging level students receive 75% of instruction in their home language and 25% in English. As student's English proficiency increases more of the instructional day is spent in English.We have TBE in grades K, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, & 5th. K and 1st have a DL program. In Bilingual classes HLA is delivered through Science and Social Studies 170 minutes weekly. Students are grouped through mixed proficiency levels and are receiving integrated services through the Bilingual teacher and Stand alone services through the ENL teacher. Students receiving 360 min receive 180 min stand alone and 180 min. integrated. Commanding students receive 90 min weekly in a content area (ELA /SS) for an additional 2 years. c. DL program. If applicable. We implemented this year a side by side DL model in English and Spanish for K and 1st grade. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Organization of our staff ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to the proficiency levels of our ELLs. In compliance with CR Part 154, ELL students who are at entering or emerging levels receive 360 minutes a week of ENL services and those that are at the transitioning or expanding level receive 180 minutes a week. In Bilingual classes HLA is delivered through science and social studies for 170 min. per week The program serves all students with limited English proficiency (ELL) until they achieve proficiency in the English language. ELL students in ENL Self-contained classes receive ENL services by their ENL certified teachers during their daily content area instruction. ELLs with IEPs in the Special Education Self-contained classes in grades 3, 4 and 5 receive ENL instruction by certified ENL or Bilingual Special Education bilingual teachers through collaborative planning for for small group ENL instruction. All other ELLs in ICT and general education classes receive ENL services by ENL certified teachers through an Integrated approach. In addition, ELL 2018-19 SCEP-FF 82  students in grades 3-5 participate in our AIS, After-School, and/or Saturday programs. The content area subjects of the core curriculum for all students includes as follows: Literacy, math, science, social studies, health, technology, physical education, art and the ENL program are taught 100% of the time in English. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All English language learners receive the same academic content as those who are native English speakers. Core content is delivered in Science and Social studies in Spanish for our TBE classes. To ensure our students’ academic progress in the ENL programs, we utilize collaborative core curriculum planning between ELA, Math and other content area classroom teachers, clusters and ENL support service teachers. This means that beyond explicit ENL collaboration between teachers also taken into consideration are the language needs of ELLs. For example, content area teachers monitor the understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms along with visual aids to clarify meaning. Also math teachers devote extra class time to untangling difficult word problems. Social Studies teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlas and illustrations to increase comprehension. Our I Ready, My On, and Think Central technology piece in math ensures every child has their own account and can log into complete work, teachers have an account as well to assess student performance in math., the two computer labs and white boards are also used to address the ELL's learning styles. Students receive social studies up to 2 times per week in Spanish depending on the proficiency levels. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Our bilingual classes use a variety of assessments such as unit test's in content areas science and social studies and math. Pedagogue speak the native language, teachers meet as a cohort to discuss, plan, and develop assessments in the native language. Bilingual students take the ELE test, NYSISTELL, NYSESLAT, running records, and WRAP. Running records and WRAP are done in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Ell subgroups are addressed as follows: 1. The students are grouped by level of proficiency in classes. 2. SIFE students are grouped in classes. Instruction is taught through thematic units and various materials are available such as Stair Step books. 3. LTE's receive targeted instruction in literacy, vocabulary. 4. Former Ell's receive 90 min. a week of ENL/content instruction. Instruction is differentiated through intensive instruction in literacy and stand alone survival skills according to grade level. The school has a two year plan to provide transitional support for ELLs that reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT students are eligible for test accommodation for all the NYS tests during the next two years. Additional support focused on enhanced cognitive, linguistic and academic growth is still offered to these students. Parents of former ELL students are invited to school - wide and NYC conferences and workshops. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All SWDs receive the same academic content as those who are native English speakers. To ensure our students' academic progress in school we utilize collaborative core curriculum planning between ELA, Math, and other content area classroom teachers, clusters and ENL support service teachers. This means that beyond specially designed instruction, teachers take into consideration the needs outlined on the IEP. For example, content area teachers monitor understanding of linguistically challenging material and use a variety of phrasings and synonyms along with visual aids to clarify meaning. Also math teachers devote extra class time to untangling difficult word problems. Social Studies teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlas, and illustrations to increase comprehension. Our Think Central technology piece in math 2018-19 SCEP-FF 83  ensures every child has their own account and can log into their account as well as assess student performance in math, computers, and white boards are also used to address the various learning styles.All English language learners receive the same academic content as those who are native English speakers. To ensure our students’ academic progress in the ENL programs, we utilize collaborative core curriculum planning between ELA, Math and other content area classroom teachers, clusters and ENL support service teachers. This means that beyond explicit ENL collaboration between teachers also taken into consideration are the language needs of ELLs. Also math teachers devote extra class time to untangling difficult word problems. Social Studies teachers scaffold their instruction with visual aids such as maps, atlas and illustrations to increase comprehension. Our Think Central technology piece in math ensures every child has their own account and can log in to complete work teachers have an account as well to assess student performance in math., the two computer labs and white boards are also used to adderss the ELLs learning styles. To maximize the English language acquisition for ELL students, the ENL teachers utilize ENL instructional strategies to deliver content area and/or small group instruction. Scaffolding is an essential part of the instructional delivery for ELLs. ENL strategies include but are not limited to: TPR, songs and chants, repetition, graphic organizers (i.e. charts, flowcharts, tables, story maps and graphs), modeling, interactive read aloud, retelling, sequencing, thematic units, language experience approach and academic accountable talk. Both, the Balanced Literacy Model Engage New York and the Go Math curriculum support differentiated instruction in targeting our ELL students. Students participate in shared, guided, and independent reading instruction and mini-lessons. Our performance data on ELA shows that our ELL population needs to work on their academic language skills along with test taking strategies. Therefore, teachers are focusing on academic vocabulary development, and reading comprehension and writing skills during classroom instruction. The performance on standardized tests also informs future planning for teachers of ELLs. In addition, we are assisting students during work periods, conferencing with students in and out of class, doing informal assessments, and running records. Additionally, we do small group sessions during, before, and after school that focus on literacy and academic language prior to all state assessments . Technology is also used to promote ELL achievement and progress. 4. When a new student is registered in our school the parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey to identify the child’s home language. If the child is identified as an eligible candidate for ENL services he/she is administered the NYSTIELL. Further, if the child’s home language is Spanish and the child does not score above the cut off score, then, he/she is adminstered the NYS Spanish Lab. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our SLT team meets monthly to analyze and plan a service delivery model that ensures access to least restrictive environment and English language development. Our SLT team consists of members with knowledge and expertise in general education, special education, and ENL. Our SIT team conducts IEP reviews to guide professional development, and consults with content area coaches to ensure curriculum and instructional planning that provides access to various types of learners, including SWD's. We have three of ENL teachers provide an integrated ENL model to students with IEPS requiring ENL services. Many students range from entering to emerging requiring 2 units and/or 360 minutes of service. Currently we have 30 students with IEPs requiring ENL services. Teachers of special education meet regularly with content area teachers to ensure curricular and instructional alignment with grade level standards. Through specially designed instruction, teachers modify and individualize daily lessons to meet the needs of their students. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions are used such as RTI, Brain Pop, Science hands on, Native Language in all Bilingual classes. All coaches and cluster teachers provide AIS services for students five days per week with a specific focus on holdovers and level 1's in ELA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 84  and/or math..Targeted intervention programs for all ELLs at P.S. 70 in Math, ELA and other areas are as follow: SETSS, ENL, Extended Day, Literacy and Math After-School RTI, Speech and Language, and Guidance counseling. The language of instruction and/or services is English and/or Spanish as needed.. We conduct IEP evaluations and parent meetings in both English and Spanish for our students with special needs. Both the ENL program and classroom teachers provide interventions in the classroom. All teachers constantly monitor students’ understanding of the content material and differentiate the instruction to develop the students’ English language proficiency in the four modalities: listening, reading, writing, and speaking . For example: They guide students to read, write, listen, ask questions, think and use the academic language to express themselves and scaffold their learning. Briefly, they engage students in a variety of meaningful tasks, that are designed according to the students’ needs and preferences. Literacy and math instruction is provided through ENL methodology in alignment with NYS Learning Standards for English language learners and the NYS Common Core Curriculum. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We implemented a Dual Language Program for K in the school year 2016- 2017 for the school year 2017-2018 we will continue our DL program for 1st grade. Tentatively each subsequent year we will add a new grade. We will have Rosetta Stone back in place as well as English 3D and Daily 5/Café for struggling readers. We have extended our in addition, laptops have been placed in the classrooms as well as smartboards. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not discontinue any of our programs for Ells we will only add to our existing programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs have equal access to the school programs and supplemental services offered in our building. We offer an assortment of after-school programs including literacy, language development and test sophistication preparation on Wednesday's and Thursday's as well as Saturday Academy, and the New-Comer after-school program on Fridays. Ell's also have access to a Family Worker, Parent Coordinator, occupational and physical therapy, speech and language therapist, social worker, and psychologist, . We provide additional after-school programs on NYS ELA and Math test preparation for ELL students in grades 3, 4 and 5. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Several new software programs are available for all ELLs. These include: SMART boards, i-ready, Starfall, Brain Pop, and Think Central. We also address the students’ learning styles and accelerate English language development through the use of Promethean white boards and the computer labs. These technology based resources support differentiated instruction and enhance ELLs’ cognitive skills, linguistic skills as well as promote academic growth. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language arts is taught through science and social studies. Teachers have leveled books in Spanish also in content areas social studies and science. We look at the Spanish LAB data, Ell test results as well as the science and math exams in Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All liteacy units of study are from Engage New York. These units correspond to the ELL's and grade levels. Grades work in teams to develop these units based on the Common Core Curriculum. All other subject areas correspond to the ELLs grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not Applicable 2018-19 SCEP-FF 85  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer summer school for ELL students that need assistance. Before school begins we have an orientation and an open house in August for parents of ELL students alongside the Parent Coordinator - Ms. Brenda Colon, Assistant Principal- Ms. Fisher, Principal - Ms. Castellano and Dual Language teachers - Ms. Melendez, Ms. Beaton and Ms. C. Torres. All ELLs have equal access to the school programs and supplemental services offered in These include: ENL, SETSS, guidance counselor, family worker, parent coordinator, occupational and physical therapy, speech and language therapist, social worker, psychologist, Extended Day, Literacy After-School, Saturday Program, AIS, and all technology related skills and language development programs. We provide additional after-school programs on NYS ELA and Math test preparation for ELL students in grades 3, 4 and 5. In order to support learning and foster community involvement, we use a portion of our funding to create supplementary programs for ELLs and their families. Parents of ELL students come to the school throughout the year to take part in community celebrations, the school-wide events and parent workshops. These events include: book sales, , Hispanic Heritage Celebration,Bread-making workshops Breast cancer Awareness workshops, Health workshops, African American History Month, 100 Days of School, holiday assemblies/celebrations and graduation ceremonies, among others. Also, school organizes many school trips in which parents often participate. Translation and interpretation services are offered to increase the involvement of parents in the school communtity. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish TBE to all Ell's. as well as Dual Language (English & Spanish) for K and 1. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? The Dual Language Model we use is side by side. We have two different classes one for english and one for spanish. We use an A/B Model one day all english the next day all spanish, students switch classes. Our DL classes comprise of native speakers as well as non-native speakers. The core content is taught in english and spanish based on the side by side A/B model depending on which day english or spanish. Emergent literacy is taught at the same time simultaneous, english day A spanish day B on Fridays teachers stay with their class and use as a review day for the week. The teacher for DL english remains with her class, and the teacher for DL spanish remains with her class. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our Professional Development plan includes specific training for our ELL personnel through the Bronx Borough Field Support Center ELL Services Coordinator. Ms. Silva our ELL teacher/coordinator attends the monthly meetings. This professional development is then turn keyed by Ms. Silva to all of our ENL and Bilingual teachers once a month on Monday's from 2:20 - 3:40 p.m. This professional development is geared to support teachers and Ell's with NYS Learning Standards for addressing the 4 modalities within the NYSESLAT assessment. Ms. Silva will also turnkey ENL strategies and scaffolds to our non -pedagogic staff on Monday October 30, 2017. Our Guidance Counselors as well attend professional development on Middle school 2018-19 SCEP-FF 86  Application Process Training,(@ I.S. 218) Child Abuse & Neglect Prevention Training (Lincoln Hospital) which is then turn keyed in September to all teachers. The following is a PD schedule through October 30,2017. We plan, update, and tweek our PD calendar every 3 months. Facilitators are grade leaders for each grade as well as our ENL teacher for Bilingual and ENL teachers. 9/11 - PD on Engagement Danielson 3C 9/18 - Planning focus Guided Reading Groups 9/25 - MOSL Writing PD, I-Ready PD 10/2 - I-Ready focus - correlating data 10/16 - Analyze student work with Grade Teams 10/23 - I-Ready Data PD, Analyze Running Records 10/30 - Grade Team Planning - Focus; Writing Baseline Trends 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Professional development sessions are offered. Our Guidance counselor visits each 5 th grade class to present and discuss various topics such as bullying, use of the middle school directory, expectations for middle school, interest level, and completing the middle school application. Our counselor also meets with small groups of students who are more comfortable in a small group or one on one basis. These activities start to take place in early November and continue for the remainder of the school year. Professional Development and Teacher Support In order to make sure that all teachers are familiar with the needs of ELLs as well as the sponsored by District 9, The DOE of NY . RBRN support from Fordham University around working with ELL students. We also have a bilingual coordinator and ENL teacher who provide continuous support to all ENL and Bilingual teachers.. We also receive support from Dr. Roser Salavert RBRN support from Fordham University. Dr. Salavert works with our Dual Language program as well as Bilingual and ENL teachers as well as /and the NYCDOE Office of English language learners provide numerous ELL workshops. All classroom teachers receive instructional support in ENL methodology. Attendance is taken and records are kept in the main office with the Principal. In order to enhance communication and collaboration among all parties working with ELLs, teachers are regularly invited to attend common planning, curriculum development, and mandatory grade conferences. In these settings, bilingual, ENL, and general education teachers meet to discuss and share instructional strategies. They also participate in curriculum planning on their grade level. During grade meetings, literacy, math, and writing coaches regularly provide supportive services. They continue this support by offering model lessons on a weekly basis. A schedule is posted monthly and all teachers are welcome to attend. in order to learn strategies necessary to effectively instruct our Ell's, teachers are additionally invited to attend professional development workshops after-school and on weekends through the NYC DOE Professional Development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 87  Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent Tuesdays are utilized to provide meetings with parents of our ELLS to discuss goals, language development, language proficiency results, and language development needs in all content areas. The school provides language translations in spanish for all parents for less frequent languages, the school uses DOE translation services as well as the Parent Orientation video in various languages. Every effort is made to find a translation in a parents' language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We have a variety of programs and classes that we offer our ELL parent population. We provide the following workshops for ELL parents: 1. How to prepare your student for ELA/Math/Science/NYSESLAT exams. 2. Dr. Salavert from RBERN Fordham Univ. comes in for a workshop on the importance of Bi-literacy. She gives the parents important information on being bilingual or learning English as a second language. 3. College and Career Readiness 4. Breadman/baking workshop The classes we provide to our ELL parents are: 1. ESL 2. Computer classes 3. How to navigate the DOE website/NYC schools account 4. How parents can communicate with their teachers on class dojo. 5. Parental Engagement Tuesdays are also meetings that are held for parents from 2:30 p.m. - 3:30 p.m. every Tuesday. We also have events/activities like holiday crafts with teachers, parents, and students. Our multi-cultural holiday feast is a great way that our families get together with our staff and enjoy the different cultures. Monthly parent meetings by our parent coordinator foster parent involvement for parents of our ELLS. In addition, special activities, celebrations, etc enhance parental involvement for our parents of ELLS. Translation services are available through either school employees (Spanish) and (African - Fante) or DOE translation hotline for less frequent languages. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 88 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kerry Castellano, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 89  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Max Schoenfeld School School DBN: #INGES Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kerry Castellano Title Principal Kimberly Fisher Assistant Principal Brenda Colon Parent Coordinator Michele Silva ENL/Bilingual Teacher Erica Lee Parent Courtney Williams Teacher/Subject Area Christine Rosado Teacher/Subject Area Zulma Bermudez Leticia Rosario-Rodriguez Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 6/15/17 2018-19 SCEP-FF 90  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X070 School Name: The Max Schoenfeld School Superintendent: Leticia Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Brenda Colon Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the NYSESLAT data, as well as the Home Language Surveys to identify our language needs. This data was gathered via several ATS reports. Also, the RAPL ATS is utilized. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English and Spanish are the parents' preferred English 49.55 49.55 49.55 2018-19 SCEP-FF 91  languages for both written and oral communication. Spanish Afrikaai Bengali French Hausa Mandink Soninke Twi Arabic Spanish 49.09 49.09 49.09 .18 .27 .18 .09 .09 .09 .09 .27 .18 .27 .18 .09 .09 .09 .09 .27 .18 .27 .18 .09 .09 .09 .09 .27 .18 .27 .18 .09 .09 .09 .09 .27 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Calendars September-June School Staff Back to School nights/Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, June Translations on the Principal's portal-Translation Unit Existing Templates Big Word School Staff Translations on the Principal's portal-Translation Unit Existing Templates Big Word Parent Association Meetings Monthly School Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FF 92  Newsletters Monthly Principal's Letters As needed Translations on the Principal's portal-Translation Unit Existing Templates Big Word School Staff Translations on the Principal's portal-Translation Unit Existing Templates Big Word School Staff Translations on the Principal's portal-Translation Unit Existing Templates Big Word Chancellor's Letters When distributed by Chancellor Principal's Portal Superintendent's Letters When distributed by Superintendent School Staff Translations on the Principal's portal-Translation Unit Existing Templates Big Word 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Back to School nights 11/2/2017 DOE intranet templates Parent/Teacher Conferences- 3/8/201 school-based-personnel Parent Association Town Hall Meeting- 9/2017 Parent workshops: Holiday Potluck Parent Association Meeting Parent and I-Ready workshop for math and literacy 11/2017 Parent ESL workshop NYS ELA/Math exams parent workshop 1/2018 translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 93  Dual Language Workshop 1/2018 Parent Association Meeting -Game Night 2/2018 Parent Association Meeting/Homebase 3/2018 parent workshop prevention of homelessness organization Parent Association test anxiety-4/21 4/2018 Parent Association Nomination Committee and Mother's day parent workshop 5/2018 Parent Elections 5/2018 CEI - Parent Training 5/2018 DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. DOE intranet templates school-based-personnel translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Transperfect-Onsite interpretation, school personnel, emergency contact cards Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff members will sign out for A-663 on September 7, 2017. Professional Development will be conducted to all staff members on translation and interpretation services at the beginning of the school year and prior to parent teacher conferences. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 94  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The name of the LAC, DFA (District Family Advocate) and phone numbers is on the Welcome Poster. Also, the parents' Bill of Rights and Language Access guides are available to parents upon request. Language ID guide is on the School Safety Desk and there is one placed in the Main Office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? School Parent Survey is given out the first week of school to gather feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 95 
