2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X076 School Name: P.S. 076 THE BENNINGTON SCHOOL Principal: DARLENE TERON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 11x076 718-882-8870 Fax: dteron@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Bennington School 32110001076 K-5 900 Adee Avenue 718-882-8865 Phone Number: Darlene Teron School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Darlene Teron JoyPell Mauro Lopez Julie Porras Mauro Lopez N/A N/A Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information CristineVaughan Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Avenue Bronx, New York 10469 cvaugha2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2620 Phone Number: 718-519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, New York 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Julie Porras Candice Pantano Member/ Staff Member/Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5 Darlene Teron JoyPell Mauro Lopez Mauro Lopez N/A N/A N/A *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elizabeth Gerace StefanieCordo Keisha Blake Sandra Flores TitanyaAnderson Kaye Stewart Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/ Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our school Mission statement is , "using school data, we will provide our students with purposeful learning goals and rigorous tasks in order to prepare our students for college and careers. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 76, also known as The Bennington School, is located in the Williamsbridge section of the Bronx. Our K - 5 school is organized heterogeneously and serves an ethnically diverse population. Our current enrollment includes 984 general education and special education students who are primarily housed in the main school building. We also have a mini-building consisting of ten classrooms. Our student demographics are 3% Asian, 46% Black, 42% Hispanic and 7% White. English Language Learners make up 13 % of our population and we also have 17% students with special needs. We experienced a significant drop in our ELA scores over the past few years although we have had some slight growth in last two yeas. A challenge for us is ensuring that all students are reading on or above grade level before moving onto the next grade. We did not evidence significant growth in our Math scores. Therefore, for the 2018-2019 school year, our instructional focus is if teachers assessment data to plan rigorous tasks that are differentiated and provide scaffolds and supports in ELA and Math, then student engagement will improve and lead to increased student achievement. Our PLC groups will use data to support planning and rigorous instruction. We will focus on the improvement of individual student reading levels with an emphasis on guided reading. In mathematics, we will focus on the implementation of mathematical practices which will enhance student understanding including implementation of the Algebra for All initiatives. These foci will be supported by our school-wide professional development and will assist in raising the level of rigorous instruction. During the 2017-2018 school year, our school showed significant growth in the elements of Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership and Strong Family Community Ties and Trust from the Chancellor's Framework. Our goal was and continues to be to empower teachers and provide consistent professional development to help support school goals throughout the school year as well as increase parent engagement. Weekly PLC meetings with teachers helped to support and monitor implementation of programs and initiatives. Monthly Coffee Friday meetings and PTA meetings with parents helped to foster a welcoming environment for parents and encourage participation in school wide programs and decision making. During the 2018-2019 school year we will continue our partnership with Education Through Music (ETM). ETM provides a teaching artist who assists us in providing formalized music instruction to all students in grades K-5. We are also able to provide band, theatre programs and on-going professional development provided by ETM throughout the school year. Our partnership with Target, and their relationship with Alvin Ailey Dance Company, enables our first grade students the opportunity to participate in a semester-long dance residency which culminates with a performance for students and their families. Food Bank of New York instructs our Kindergarteners on making better nutritional choices and promotes healthy eating through participation in hands-on cooking experiences through their CookShop program. Monthly workshops are provided for the parents of these students in order to inform and instruct them on the benefits of healthy eating as well. Participants receive healthy recipes and free groceries to use in their 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  homes. Our relationship with Legacy Pathways will support teachers and encourage deeper thinking in mathematics and encourage high level discussion around math in grades K-5. In order to continue to strengthen our student's social and emotional well being we will continue to work closely with a Mental Health facilitator who will assist us in making connections with outside agencies. Staff have been trained on using Restorative Circles to promote community within the classroom and support social emotional growth of our students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our strengths include maintaining a positive school climate and tone through the implementation of our school- wide Bennington Buzz positive behavior program. Staff and students are familiar with the Bennington Buzz rubric and positive behaviors are encouraged through the use of our Bee coupons. We will be enhancing the Buzz program through the distribution of BEE Bucks and the opening of a Bennington Shop in which students can spend the BEE bucks on prizes of their choice. Weekly activities are held for randomly selected students and monthly Spirit assemblies are held for all. As we plan for the upcoming school year we will focus on ensuring that scaffolds and supports are consistently provided for our ENL students and Students with Disabilities. Historically these special populations have not made significant progress. An after school program will be provided as a supplemental resource for our ENL students in literacy beginning in November and the Do the Math intervention progam will be used with our SWDs to provide basic math foundational skills support. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. As a school we are continuously evaluating the quality of school- level decisions, making adjustments as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school, paying particular attention to the Common Core Learning Standards. As indicated in our 2016-2017 Quality Review, in relation to Effective School Leadership, this is a strength in the school. The impact is that feedback to teachers articulates clear expectations for teacher practice, supports teacher development and aligns with professional goals of teachers. Feedback from our 2017-2018 PPO visit supports this as well. We will continue to support teachers through the process of organized observation cycles, providing timely and actionable feedback requiring teacher reflections and follow up. PPO feedback in relation to Rigorous Instruction and assessment of student understanding indicates improvement is needed in assessing students while the lesson takes place. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year there will be an increased emphasis on data, looking closely at student work in teams and how classroom teachers use the information to best meet the needs of their students. Professional development on assessment will support teachers in ensuring they are consistently checking in with students and making necessary adjustments throughout the lesson. Teachers will be more responsive to student needs and we will monitor progress throughout the school year. Additionally, our two instructional coaches in ELA and Math will continue to support teachers in curriculum mapping, demonstration lessons and professional development. Throughout the school year our professional development will be tailored to meet the needs of our teachers based upon observation data and personal needs of teachers. . 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X076 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 956 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 72 72 19 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 7 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 76.0% % Attendance Rate 74.4% % Reduced Lunch 14.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 42.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 6.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.07 0% 30% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 22.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 60% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups White Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO NO NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 143 141 90.8% 1.3% 16.3% 45.3% 4.1% 1.6% 6 0% 6.1 17.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Capacity Framework in order to ensure rigorous instruction, a successful classroom requires a strong curriculum, aligned to the Common Core, that challenges students, scaffolds their experience, and is enlivened by teachers who are engaged with their craft. The curriculum must meet students where they are and customize inclusive, motivating instruction. Rigorous instruction aligns practice and content to Common Core strategies within and across grades. In relation to 3.5, teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of and ownership of learning. As indicated in our 2016-2017 Quality Review, actionable feedback is provided to students and teachers regarding student achievement and teachers do make adjustments to meet learning needs during lessons. As a school we need to:  Ensure teacher teams are using protocols for examining student work pieces such as performance tasks, baseline assessments, and writing aligned to the unit of study to inform, differentiate and adjust instruction.  Assessment is embedded throughout lessons. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Students need to be given opportunities to reflect on their learning and create their own learning goals   Portfolios need to be developed within classrooms  Professional development for teachers which provides pedagogical systems and approaches (ex: conferring, reciprocal teaching) to support student-centered learning, ownership and accountability. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, every student in each class will have a student portfolio with a collection of student self-selected tasks that reflect mastery of student goals and demonstrate increased mastery of the ELA and Math standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). . Teachers will engage in intervisitations with a focus on student engagement  PLC meetings will be held weekly. Teachers will create session goals based on students needs and analysis of student work.  Professional development will be provided to teachers to support high levels of engagement and student accountability. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Sept 2018 - June 2019 Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coaches and Administration  Teachers will be provided with PD sessions and resources to increase accountable talk within classrooms  Criteria for student portfolios will be developed by vertical   team to ensure cohesive practices in grades K-5. Students will begin to self-reflect on completed tasks Instructional Coaches will be providing ongoing professional development. Grades K through 5 Grades K through 5 September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 Administration and coaches Administration, coaches and lead teachers Grades K through 5 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, coaches and lead teachers Grades K through 5 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Vertical team members 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Grades K through 5 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Grades K through 5 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Self-contained teachers will continue to work collaboratively with the general education teachers to modify the curriculum to meet the needs of their students. SWDs, ELL students Sept 2018 - June 2019  ENL providers will utilize scaffolds and supports for ELLs in order to ensure entry points for all students. Coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our monthly PTA meetings when applicable we share the CCLS and provide resources and ideas for parents to support students throughout the schoolyear. We will focus on a different content areas based upon the monthly activities that are taking place. Administration, classroom teachers and instructional coaches will lead these workshops for parents.We will continue to provide differentiated parent workshops during our monthly PTA meetings at which time we highlight and share useful strategies and practices being used in the classroom and that can be reinforced at home as well. We will continue our monthly Coffee Fridays to meet with parents and share information about curriculum and school-wide initiatives and events. This is also an opportunity for parents to ask questions and share concerns. Monthly school newsletter is distributed to all parents to provide information about curriculum and tips for supporting their children at home. A Parent Welcome Center will be created for parents to visit for support and attend parent classes that will be offered throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Schedule adjustments to support teacher team meetings Literacy Consultant to support teachers Instructional Coaches Per Session PD Parent monies to support parent programs 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, there should be at least two samples of student work included in portfolios that demonstrates growth in ELA and Math. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Baseline, benchmark and end of unit assessments in ELA and formative and summative Legacy Lab tasks in Math will be used for assessment. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school promotes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by teachers and their peers. In relation to SOP 5.3, the school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers and students, our school's strengths are: ● Effective implementation of the Bennington Buzz, our version of PBIS, ensures students are familiar with positive behaviors and these are consistently reinforced. - To heighten students awareness of College and Careers teachers wear college t-shirts on Fridays and discuss college and career goals 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20       In relation to SOP 5.3, as indicated by feedback from teachers during End of Year conferences and reflections on OORS data, our school’s needs are: to consistently implement various strategies to assist in deescalation of negative behaviors to increase the strategies and systems in place to assist teachers in supporting students who struggle behaviorally to decrease the number of negative behavioral incidents to implement a student government to ensure student voice in the school is heard. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, all staff will be familiar with and engaged in full implementation of the updated schoolwide P.S. 76 PBIS program and there will be a decrease in the number of incidents by 5% which will be measured through the OORS online reporting system. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Our school promotes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported and challenged by teachers and their peers. We will continue to share our mission statement which states, “Using school data, we will provide our students with purposeful learning goals and rigorous tasks in order to prepare our students for college and careers."  Create a committee to update and revise our PBIS program.  Continue to grow and promote the Schoolwide Bennington Buzz PBIS program. This promotes positive behaviors and students receive Bee coupons as reward. Select students take part in weekly Buzz activities.  BEE bucks will be created, introduced and distributed to students for positive behaviors. The Bennington Store will be available for students to shop for selected items.  Continue monthly Spirit Assemblies which encourage the sense of community.  Two guidance counselors will continue to work with students either through whole class conversations or group sessions to support their social and emotional development.  Create a student government that meets monthly to ensure that students are participating in decision making and that voices are heard from all All students All staff and Administration All students All students All students Daily Staff and Admin All staff Monthly Daily 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22   Stomp Out Bullying initiative will be implemented to raise awareness about bullying and have all students and staff vested in stopping bullying from happening. Monthly All staff  Train new staff members on the use of Restorative Circles who will then implement in order to create communities within their classrooms which support a positive climate and behaviors   Anti-bullying assembly for students will be held  Stomp out bullying initiative and contract program will be implemented  Train one grade using the Brain Power Wellness program to At-risk and mandated students All students represented by a few support positive behaviors and turnkey to other grades All students and staff All students and staff Daily Guidance counselors Monthly Guidance counselors All students and staff Daily Admin and guidance counselors All students and staff All staff and students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  ● Teachers will form partnerships so that SWDs and ELLs are paired with a buddy who can support his/her ability to participate in classroom activities and discussions ELLs and SWDs  Identity unit will be implemented as the first ELA unit to assist teachers and students in getting to know one another and understand differences  Partnership with QSAC will provide professional development for teachers on social skills training and strategies to address challenging behaviors for autistic students. ELLs and SWDs October 2018-June 2019 Admin, Child study team members, Parent Coordinator PD Provider PD Provider All staff November 2018 - June 2019 October 2018 October 2018 September 2018 through June 2019 September-2018-December 2018 November 2018 - June 2019 All staff and Administration Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  SWDs (all students) and staff Child Study Team and PD providers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents will be provided with our school's belief statements which indicate how P.S. 76 believes students learn best. Strategies and structures used to deescalate situations will be shared with parents in our monthly newsletter.   QSAC will host workshop for parents on managing challenging behaviors of autistic students  NYPD anti-bullying workshop for parents will be held Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per session funding for planning and professional development for teachers  Buzz incentives to support character attributes character education program to support goals  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February we will analyze data to determine if the de-escalation strategies are being implemented consistently and the impact of the strategies. We will refer to the OORS reports and compare the number of incidents from last year at the same time to determine if the incidents are fewer. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2016-17 school data, 21% of our third, fourth and fifth grade students met State standards on the State ELA test. As indicated in the 2016-2017 Quality Review report, coherent curricula across grades and content areas promote college and career readiness. All learners are expected to demonstrate their thinking. In relation to SOP 4.2, school and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs the school's strengths are:   School leaders provide opportunities two to three times a week for teachers to collaborate during common preparatory periods. School leaders provide weekly professional learning community meetings with the support of the school's Assistant Principals and Instructional coaches. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26   The school is part of the DOE's Learning Partner Program which provides our school the opportunity to collaborate and visit with partner schools. During these visits and monthly meetings best practices are shared which support school goals.  Two school-based instructional coaches will help to support staff throughout the school year in both literacy and math. As stated in the 2016-2017 Quality Review, although all students, including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks and demonstrate higher order thinking skills, opportunities for strategic high quality supports and extensions into the curricula are limited. The 2017-2018 PPO feedback includes the need for teachers to assess students while the classroom lesson takes place. The schools needs are:  To ensure that teachers are providing students with scaffolds and supports in every lesson in order access rigorous tasks  Rubrics and checklists are provided for each writing task and that teachers are frequently looking at student work to make curriculum adjustments to ensure writing growth In relation to SOP 4.5, teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources, the school's strengths are:  Our MOSL measure is for students to show growth in their writing using the NYC Performance Task. In relation to SOP 4.5, the school's needs are:  To establish protocols for weekly data inquiry meetings with a focus on analyzing students' writing in order to identify implications and next steps for both whole group and small group instruction.  Professional Learning community meetings will focus on looking at student work and determining next steps for instruction.  To establish protocols for students to monitor their own progress toward growing as writers.  Creation of baseline, benchmark and end of unit assessments for each writing unit in order to monitor progress Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By June 2019, teachers will analyze writing assessment data throughout the school year to inform writing instruction resulting in schoolwide growth of at least one level in each trait area in writing as evidenced on the EOY MOSL from the baseline MOSL task. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Administration and Instructional coaches will support staff during weekly PLC meetings on looking closely at student work to plan for instruction. - Teachers will rotate the planning and facilitation of PLCs with a focus on student work and making instructional adjustments that will meet the needs of diverse learners. - Teachers will measure writing growth over time by evaluating baseline, benchmark and end of unit assessments using a standards based rubric. - Differentiated, small group instruction will be planned for based upon student's needs - Student-centered learning will be focus in classrooms. -Professional development will be provided to teachers to support student-centered learning which includes consistent small group, differentiated instruction. - Depth of Knowledge questions will be used to push student thinking and discussion about their writing September 2018 to June 2019 All staff September/October 2018 All staff Monthly Daily Daily All staff Monthly Administration, Classroom Teachers and Instructional coaches Classroom teachers, instructional coaches and administration Classroom teachers, instructional coaches and administration Classroom teachers All staff All staff November 2018 - June 2019 Instructional coaches and administration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Administration and instructional coaches Classroom teachers All staff Classroom teachers ● Self-contained special education teachers work with grade level teams that best match their students’ functional level. ● All special education teachers will continue to work with one another to make additional modifications to meet the needs of their students’ individual IEP goals. October 2018 to June 2019 All Special Education teachers, paraprofessionals and ENL providers Administration, Classroom Teachers, Instructional Coaches, ENL providers  Paraprofessionals will provide small group instruction to students in their classrooms daily  ENL providers will use scaffolds and supports to assist students in accessing the curriculum. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parents will receive notification of their child's independent writing level on each of his/her assessments so they are aware and may assist their children to improve.  Monthly parent newsletter includes specific information related to writing genres being taught in school for the month.  During Parent Engagement time, teachers have opportunities to share individual student writing levels as assessments are completed. They will share strategies that parents may utilize when working with their children at home in order to assist in making writing progress. Growth will be shared with parents throughout the school year through progress reports as well as PTCs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  The following resources are needed to implement this action plan;  Professional development opportunities available.  Articulation time, prep changes and teacher coverage as needed.  Professional Development time scheduled for collaborative planning.    Program resources to support scaffolding  Common planning to promote collaboration built into schedules Literacy Consultant Instructional Coaches Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, baseline writing data will be compared to end of unit writing assessments that have been completed at that time. This review will include an analysis of the assessments in order to determine growth of student writing at each level, for each trait and will determine if the school is on course to meet the annual goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Standards based writing rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school leaders will monitor the observation data in Advance for component 3d, Assessment in Instruction, to ensure the implementation of formative assessments throughout lessons and high quality instruction to increase student success.  All staff will be provided with the instructional focus template which includes the focus statement and action plan for the 2018-2019 school year.  Opportunities are provided for teachers to meet two to three times a week to work plan collaboratively.  Teachers meet for weekly PLCs with the APs and instructional coaches for professional development.  The school will continue to be a part of the DOE's Learning Partners Program for the 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31   Teachers have been provided with on-going professional development on the framework for Danielson and  have created resources for one another in each domain. Instructional coaches and administration are New Teacher Mentor Center for continued professional development to support instructional practices in the classroom.  Teachers continue to share best practices for each component that will be rated this year. ● Teachers receive verbal and written feedback in a timely manner. ● All observation data is entered into the Advance System, allowing administration to analyze the data for school wide patterns and trends to plan for professional development. ● Actionable feedback is provided to teachers with specific recommendations. Teachers are required to provide timely reflection on the implementation of the recommendation and its impact on student learning. ● Administration is committed to continuing to improve observation and norming practices by participating in on-going professional development offered by our District Talent Coach. In relation to SOP 2.5, our school’s needs are: ● to consistently and effectively analyze Advance observation data in order to provide targeted professional development  ensuring that assessment is happening in all classrooms throughout lessons in order for all teachers to effectively differentiate instruction for students Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. At least 75% of teachers will increase to an Effective Rating as rated during MOTP with the Danielson Framework in at least one of the components of Domain 3 to support progress towards meeting our instructional focus evidenced through four Advance observation cycles and the use of the Advance Dashboard to track teacher progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Provide professional development in alignment with the Danielson Framework and Effective pedegogical practices in relation to Domain 3; Questioning and Discussion Techniques, Engagement and Using Assessment. (Discussion and questioning protocols, reciprocal teaching, differentiation for small group instruction, etc.) School leaders will analyze Advance observation data for component 3d throughout the 2018-2019 school year and provide professional development which will help to enhance teacher effectiveness and instructional practices for this component in all core subject areas.   An IFC team will be formed and engage in school intervisits  and collaboration around rigor. IFC teachers will provide monthly professional development to all staff around the use of a rigor rubric to support the implementation of more rigorous practices in the classroom.  Effective Practices observed will be shared by administration, instructional coaches and teacher teams.  Departmentalizing on grades 4 and 5 will support teacher   strength in one content area. Implementation of Algebra for All initiative on grades 4 and 5. Select teachers will attend Algebra for All trainings throughout the school year, turnkey to grade level department teams (4-5) and pilot practices learned in their classrooms.  Metamorphosis consultant will support 4th and 5th grade teachers throughout the school year with adult learning, planning for instruction, lab sites and debriefs.  Mentors will review the Danielson Framework with mentees and provide support as needed  Administration will meet with new teachers monthly to provide support.  Teachers will review student work during PLC meetings to analyze trends and make instructional adjustments. All staff All staff All staff Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration and PD committee October 2018 - June 2019 All staff, administration and instructional coaches Bi-monthly Monthly beginning December 2018 Administration 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Teachers will receive Math support from a consultant in order to enhance Math Talk and Assessment in the classroom and implement "Legacy Labs" throughout the school year. Administration Following every observation conducted Weekly Teachers September 2018-June 2019 December 2018 - June 2019 Mentors and new teachers Admin and New Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34   Professional development will be provided to ICT and self-contained teachers who will administer a Math Inventory assessment and be using the assessment data to provide targeted instruction to students using the Do the Math intervention program Self-contained special education teachers will participate in all professional development with appropriate grade level teams   ENL providers will be provided with professional development on effective assessment practices as well as the Fountas and Pinnell leveling assessment Inter-visitations will be scheduled so that teachers can offer one another feedback.  Teachers of SWDs October 2018 Administration, ICT and Self-contained Teachers and instructional coaches Administration, ICT and Self-contained Teachers and instructional coaches Teachers of SWDs On-going ENL providers, instructional coaches, administration ENL providers Bi-monthly All staff All staff On-going September 2018 to June 2019 Administration, Parent Coordinator ●Monthly newsletters will include ways that parents can assist their child at home within the areas of focus. All Staff  Teachers will be provided with the opportunity to share tips and strategies for parents in monthly newsletters.  Assessments will be sent home with students for parent's to review 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During parent workshops, administration, classroom teachers and instructional coaches will share the Danielson rubric and rating system with parents, explaining the different components and the strategies that teachers utilize within their classrooms. All staff will share expectations with parents and provide strategies for parents to use at home will be provided. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional coaches to support this work  Professional development team will meet regularly to review survey results and implementation plan   Math consultant to support this work  Materials and resources to support teachers with initiative (ex: attribute cards)   Technology support Survey monkey account in order to create teacher surveys Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In March 2019, Advance data will be analyzed in order to determine if at least 50% of the teachers rated Effective in one component of Domain 3. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance MOTP data for Domain 3. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the results of our 2016-2017 School Environment Survey, 92% of parents are satisfied with the education their child has received at P.S. 76. Our School Quality Snapshot indicates that 93% of parents say staff regularly communicates with them about how they can help their children learn. In relation to SOP 6.2, the school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student achievement as evidenced in our school's strengths are:  Monthly newsletter is distributed to parents from the Parent Coordinator which includes upcoming events, tips and strategies  Parent Engagement time on Tuesday allows teachers the opportunity to meet with parents and share tips and strategies to support children  PTA meetings provide differentiated workshops to meet parent's needs  Coffee Friday sessions once a month provide an opportunity for parents to share concerns and ask questions. Our school's needs are: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  To communicate monthly with parents what topics will be covered in ELA and Math, upcoming trips and tips and strategies to support students at home.  Workshops to educate parents on the topics of Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers and Effective Leadership and what each area represents.  Workshops to educate and familiarize parents with the CCLS and ways to support and help children achieve.  To share school wide grading policy with parents so they are clear about expectations or children.  Implement school wide homework policy which includes clear expectations and ensures helpful feedback. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an 5% increase in the percentage of positive responses on the School Survey in the areas of Rigorous Instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Workshops and presentations will be planned for Parents to share School Leadership Practices, Collaborative Teachers and Rigorous Instruction. Parents Monthly ● These three areas for improvement will be discussed during Coffee Fridays and Monthly PTA meetings. Parents Monthly Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, PTA and Parent Coordinator PTA Executive Board, Parent Coordinator and Administration, Teachers  Multiple opportunities will be provided for parents to Parents complete the survey at the end of February and early March so that they are not rushed to complete it the night parent-teacher conferences. Rationale for completion will be shared with parents to inform them of the importance of completion and how it helps Principal and staff determine necessary next steps for the school. Scaffolds and supports being used with students in the classrooms will be shared with parents so they are aware and may utilize at home.  February and May Administration and PTA Executive Board Teachers November 2018 through June 2019 Administration and Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39   Teachers will share coherent expectations for Equity, Homework, Classwork and all parents will receive a copy of the School-Wide Grading Policy.  Additional outside agencies will join the school throughout the year to support parents. (ex: Beacpn)  Partnership with YMCA exists Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  PTA Executive Board and School Leadership Team members  Parent Coordinator   Resources and materials for parents to encourage participation Scheduling time for formal meetings and follow up time for staff and parent collaboration Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will provide parents with an opportunity to complete a shorter but similarly formatted survey at the end of February. We will gauge progress by the number of completed surveys we receive as well as feedback provided from parents at our monthly PTA meetings and Coffee Fridays. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created parent survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) English Language Arts (ELA) Leveled Literacy , Guided Reading and Fundations are provided to students struggling in reading and to students who need support to move reading levels; Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) LLI – small group Guided Reading – small group Fundations – whole class Fundations- small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) LLI – during the school day daily Guided Reading – during the school day Fundations – during the school day Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Grades 1-5 – teachers use a variety of strategies dependent upon individual student needs. ● Leveled Literacy Instruction (LLI) supplementary literacy intervention includes strategies to improve fluency, phonics, reading and writing including phonics, word work, repeated readings, guided reading, writing responses and on-going assessment and discussion on texts read ● Guided Reading – support for small groups of readers as they learn to use various reading strategies (context clues, letter and sound relationships, word structure, etc.) ● Fundations – Self-contained classrooms; a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Mathematics phonological/ phonemic awareness, phonics and spelling program . Lessons focus on carefully sequenced skills that include print knowledge, alphabet awareness, phonological awareness, phonemic awareness, decoding, vocabulary, fluency, and spelling ● Go Math Tiered intervention activities – Tier 2 and Tier 3 math intervention activities specifically designed to address student misunderstanding at different levels - Do the Math - small group instruction and games geared toward needed skills Go Math Tiered Intervention activities – students selected based upon assessment results and daily performance in math Do the Math Intervention - modules used to accelerate math growth by providing foundational support needed determined by universal screener Go Math Tiered intervention activities - small groups Go Math Tiered intervention activities – during the school day Do the Math - small group Do the Math - during the school day, daily Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Students who need additional support based upon formative and summativeassessments Students who need additional support based upon formative andsummativeassessments Students struggling with social/emotional issues are serviced Repeated teaching of content with scaffolds and/or support Repeated teaching of content with scaffolds and/or support At risk Counseling – provided by the guidance counselor. Strategies taught Small group instruction Small group instruction During the school day During the school day individual or in small groups During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42 Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) may include conflict resolution, peer mediation, reflection and coping skills 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 29 students in temporary housing according to our current numbers. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. At P.S. 76 we provide students in temporary housing with the following services: -school uniforms throughout the school year -all necessary school supplies throughout the school year -payment for any class trips scheduled throughout the school year -winter coats and boots -at-risk counseling services if needed by the guidance counselors -parent advocacy if needed is provided by the Parent Coordinator -confidential requested and/or necessary referrals to outside agencies (ex: food pantries, mental and physical health services, etc.) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified.  We work with several Colleges to provide student teaching placements, field work experiences and observation experiences to both undergraduate and graduate level students. Potential candidates are observed in these positions and recommendations are made by cooperating staff for future employment. Newly hired staff members are assigned to teach in their license areas and each new teacher is provided with a mentor who provides support throughout the school year. At present all staff members have been identified as highly qualified. In order to maintain this identification, Assistant Principals and Instructional Coaches meet weekly with all teachers to provide professional development in areas such as, effectively administering assessments, revising curriculum, utilizing standards based resources to enhance instruction, etc. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Ongoing professional development each week will be provided with a focus on looking at student work and the Common Core Learning Standards. Our Assistant Principals and Instructional coaches will meet weekly with teachers to plan, share feedback and provide professional development to support staff, as we continue to create, adjust and implement our ELA curriculum with the use of our Benchmark Literacy program as enrichment and/or support. Administration is committed to observing all teaching staff and providing actionable feedback with a focus on student learning. Differentiated professional development is offered throughout the year to support teachers in growing and developing professionally. Staff and Administration participate in professional development offered by our District 11 Borough Office and NYCDOE. Surveys will be administered throughout the year to elicit professional development needs of the staff. Staff will have opportunities to provide professional development to colleagues if they choose as well. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Children and parents have an opportunity to meet their teacher and visit their classroom on the first day of school. Parents participate in an informational session with future Kindergarten teachers. Parents are given a packet of resources to help their child transition to Kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. For the 2018-2019 school year a MOSL committee will be formed to make recommendations to administration on the measures that will be used to evaluate teacher effectiveness. All staff will be presented with the recommendations. Professional Development will be provided to all staff on norming scoring practices and on analyzing student work to plan for next steps in instruction. We will continue to administer the survey that was created for teachers to complete with specific questions related to the professional development they would need to address the student needs related to the school's MOSL selections. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47 Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 733,085.00 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Federal 16,979 109,558.00 108,123 Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal 18,254.00 not released as of yet 5,559,640.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X x X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a-4b, 5b-4b, 5c-4b,5d-4b,5e-4b 5a-4b, 5c-4b, 5e-4b 5a-4b,5c-4b 5a-4b, 5b-4b,5c-4b,5-,4b 5a-4b N/A 5a-4b,5b-4b,5c-4b,5d-4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS76, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 76x will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51    schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 76 THE BENNINGTON SCHOOL 900 ADEE AVENUE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  BRONX, NEW YORK 10469 Darlene Teron Principal Candice Pantano Julie Porras Elizabeth Gerace Assistant Principal Assistant Prinicipal Assistant Principal School-Parent Compact PS76, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53      conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; arranging opportunities for parents to observe classroom activities;   planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, PTA Meetings, Workshops. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54     creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check my child’s schoolbag and folder daily for notices, homework, tests, and quizzes; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;      promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms, school wide policies, and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55   participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   3. III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities:       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our direct instruction supplemental program will be used to support English language development in all four modalities for our ELL students who are at the TRANSITIONING and EXPANDING levels of English proficiency. To create this target group, we will analyze data from the RLAT report, available from ATS, particularly the NYSESLAT scores from Spring 2018. We will also consider data from the EDAT report in selecting and instructing our students for the program. Our program will be designed to strengthen skills in written and oral expression, as well as improving reading and listening comprehension. Students selected for the program will be in grades 3, 4, and 5. We hope to provide a program which will enable these students to advance to the next level of English proficiency. Our program will be held Saturday mornings, for four hours, from The program will begin on October 20th and end May 25th. Staff for this program will be four certified ENL teachers: Penelope McKown, Elizabeth Brombacker, Ronan Ryan and Stephanie Mendoza. We plan to include a volunteer, an Arabic-speaking family member, to serve as an aide during some of the sessions. The direct instruction will be given in English, with some native language words uses as appropriate to build a bridge to comprehension for the students. ENL students slated for this program know some French and Spanish, although they are not totally fluent in these languages. For this direct instruction supplemental program, we will be using materials from the National Geographic Reach program. We have used these engaging materials with success in past after-school programs. The Reach program weaves alternating thematic units of social studies and science into its English language instruction. In addition, students are exposed to mathematical components such as graphs and statistics in their reading passages. This differentiated program includes academic vocabulary, listening and reading comprehension, fiction and non-fiction readings, and writing. There is a heavy focus on reading comprehension, with specific strategies for the teacher to follow. Stories are culturally diverse, with characters with whom our ELLs can identify. Reach also scaffolds instruction, which we found especially helpful in building comprehension for our students. The writing program is especially teachable. We used this program this past year in our after-school program for first, second, third, and fourth grade students, and the children learned as much from it as they loved using it. The program's variety really engages the children, and the units of study are appealing to teachers, as well as to students. We have found it to be a fun program to teach and when the students see us having fun, they are more inclined to respond positively to our instruction. Although we have already purchased many components of the Reach program, we will need to buy a new supply of Reach workbooks. Last year, the students were thrilled to take their workbooks home to read and use. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information By using the Reach materials for our program, we will expose our students to grade-level content. We will add rigor and accountability to the program by administering Benchmark assessments, a pre-assessment in October and a mid-program assessment in January to measure growth. We will also provide word banks, Frayer model exercises, and discussion protocols to add scaffolding. In addition, we will have students form multiple grades working together in a buddy system within a group so that knowledge within different age groups can be shared by students at the same English proficiency level. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ENL teachers involved in this program will need specific training to develop the skills needed to use effectively and competently the materials designated for instruction. We plan to invite staff developers from Reach to work with the ENL teachers so that they will be able to obtain the maximum benefits of this multi-faceted program for our students. There are many online components of Reach that provide engaging visual aids for our ELLs. Some of the ENL teachers will need training to use this SmartBoard-based technology to its full potential. This training may be provided by Reach personnel or by in-house staff. After initial training sessions on Reach materials, ongoing support and will be provided by telephone and repeat visits by Reach personnel to our school. In addition, ongoing training and support will be provided by ENL specialists from the UFT Teacher Center and from the Bronx Field Support Center. The ENL Coordinator attends monthly professional sessions at the District ENL Liaison meetings and turnkeys this information to other ENL staff. Information about other Title III programs will also be shared in this way. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: Parents in our school will receive training to help them take on a more active and involved role in the day-to-day education of their children. We plan to have three parent meetings during the course of our program - one welcoming orientation session at the beginning of the program, one progress meeting in the middle of the program, and one celebratory meeting at the end of the program. During the orientation session, parents will have the opportunity to meet the ENL teachers and hear about the materials the will be used in the program. ENL teachers will also use this opportunity to introduce our ENL Parent Handbook and demonstrate how to use it. We will also have presentations by each ENL teacher in which parents will learn about ways to help their children at home and with homework each night. Materials, translated into native languages as needed, will be distributed to parents and each family will be given a binder in which to file their papers. It is our hope that this Parent Resource binder will become a useful tool for our ELL families, as they will be able to add to it at each of the three meetings. During our second, mid-program meeting, ELL teachers and students will meet with parents to display and explain the work they have completed thus far. Students will pick one piece of work from their notebooks or folders to share with their parent or family member. This meeting will take the form of an ENL Parent Tea Party, with refreshments served. Parents will receive additional resources to keep and file in their Parent Resource binders. Our last parent engagement meeting will be a celebration of the program and the progress the children have made. Children will present a craft they have made relating to a topic they have studied in their Reach units. At this meeting, parents will also be invited to share stories and memories, photos, or other information about their native cultures. Children and parents and extended family members will be invited to attend, dressed in their native dress, and will be invited to speak about what they are wearing. If parents would like to bring food from their native cultures, that would also be welcomed. Resources about reading and working at home with children during the summer months will also be shared. This information will be added to the Parent Resource binders to become a reference that can be used over the summer break. In addition, accessing and using the local public library and enrolling in its summer programs will also be a topic of our last meeting. To ensure parent engagement and comprehension during the three program sessions, we will communicate with families using their preferred languages. To inform parents about the sessions, we will send home flyers that have been translated by the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. We will follow up with phone calls to the parents using the many languages available through the Language Line service. On the evenings prior to the three sessions, we will use the School Messenger to send recorded messages to in a variety of languages to homes so that parents can be reminded in their preferred languages. At the three parent engagement meetings, we will have our Parent Coordinator or another Spanish-speaking staff member translate for those family members who speak Spanish. We plan to use and have budgeted for an Arabic interpreter provided by the DOE to facilitate understanding for our Arabic-speaking parents. To show sensitivity to the culture of our Arabic-speaking parents (mostly mothers at these meetings), we will see if we can request a female translator. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Salary for four ENL teachers. Fee for Arabic-speaking translator to attend 3 parent engagement sessions, 2 hours each Student folders, student notebooks, binders for parent resources and Reach Student consumables N/A N/A N/A N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $16,982  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $468.00 $804.00 N/A N/A N/A $18,254 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name The Bennington School Borough Bronx School Number 076 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Darlene Teron Coach Alessandria Rodriguez ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ronan Ryan Teacher/Subject Area Penelope McKown, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Marian Hartstein, ENL Related-Service Provider Melissa Salzberger Superintendent Meisha Ross Porter Assistant Principal Candice Pantano Coach Cara McDonnell School Counselor Micaela Tomasetti Parent Ignayra Lopez Parent Coordinator Gloribel-Rivera Peralta Field Support Center Staff Member Wladamir Pierre Other (Name and Title) Katherine Chryssikos C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 962 Total number of ELLs 159 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.53% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we use the Fountas and Pinnell leveling assessment. This assessment provides benchmark leveling of students by analyzing decoding, reading comprehension, and fluency. Running records are an important part of this assessment. In past years, we noticed from our data that many new kindergartner ELLs were lacking in letter/sound recognition and other early literacy skills. This information prompted the implementation of our school made Literacy Profile Assessment which is comprised of print concepts, letter names and sounds, four Fountas and Pinnell word lists, and the Fountas and Pinnell reading 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  level assessments. This is used to assess and determine targeted areas for remediation. This is assessment is formally administrated three times a year, in September, January, and May. This data can be used to drive instruction, both for the classroom and the ENL teacher. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teacher folders are available in each classroom and contain F&P assessments of individual students by level which include the miscue analysis and implications for instructions. All staff are provided with the Literacy Continuum to be used as a resource when planning for guided reading instruction. Teachers, including the ENL teachers participate in Professional Learning Community (PLC) meetings for planning and collaboration once a week. Our school is also participating in the Learning Partner’s Program. The triad will be focusing on targeting the needs to ELL students and addressing best practices. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Classroom teachers administer the NYC performance task to obtain a baseline for writing skills for student in K-5. Certain ELL’s were exempt due to being in the county for less than a year. At the beginning of the year, students are assessed with the Fountas and Pinnell leveling assessment; it is repeated twice after the initial assessment. For the new ELL’s, the NYSITELL identifies a baseline of language capabilities. As the student advances through school the NYSESLAT measures progress from year to year. This year, for the first time, we will administer the ELL periodic assessment to gain more data to help in identifying student’s needs. We will use data from the EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) to identify areas of need for at-risk students. After examining the EDAT, we found that writing and Reading were areas of concern that we will target in this year’s instructional plan. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Leveled Literacy Intervention is being used by the AIS reading specialist to move student levels based upon data findings. As ELL teachers, we scaffold instruction and provide necessary support such as visual cues, sentence starters, and vocabulary instruction. Spring Forward is an intervention used by the ENL teachers to lift the students in all four modalities. ENL pull out classes provide extra phonics practice for those who were targeted using the EDAT. Title III funding has been allocated for after school and Saturday academy. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data from Schoolnet which analyzes assessments according to skills and standards. We also consider the ELL students’ Fountas and Pinnell reading levels and their progression of improvement. At that point, we provide RTI services for students who are not making adequate progress. RTI services are fluid based on student needs in ELA, math, or the content areas. RTI services can include, but are not limited to, re-teaching, Leveled Literacy Intervention, Guided Reading, small group strategy lessons, writing, and re-teaching Go Math material. Base on F&P running records students were selected to receive leveled literacy intervention on grade level 2. The students will be seen during a 6 week cycle in order ot bring them up to grade level. Classroom teachers will be providing RTI services to students within the core instruction through the use of supplemental guided reading and small group lessons 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We used data from the EDAT and the RLAT to evaluate and inform our ELL planning of the programs and the correlated instruction. The data that appears on the EDAT regarding NYSESLAT scores allows us to identify areas of strength and weakness in the four modalities. Specific to our school, we noticed, students have scored high in speaking but low in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  writing. This allows us to target writing in the classroom as well as in our pull out instruction. This data also helps us to plan for the allocation of our Title III funds based on the student’s needs. The EDAT allows us to identify the students at risk. It gives a snap shot of the students regarding the students’ attendance; students’ state tests results, the students’ hold over status, the students language proficiency level, and the students growth percentile. The EDAT also address which students have made no progress on NYSESLAT or have regressed on NYSESLAT. You can also identify who is at risk of becoming a long term an ELL student. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teachers analyze EDAT data during their weekly group PLCs (Professional Learning Communities) to analyze students’ strengths and weaknesses with regards to the NYSESLAT and ELA exams. PLCs are weekly meetings that are attended by all ENL teachers where we are given the opportunity to co-plan and review data, and discuss how the data can be used to inform targeted instruction, especially to at-risk students. The ENL coordinator and the technology specialist review the EDUR monthly to ensure that all students are scheduled for the required amount of instructional time, in Integrated and Stand Alone instruction, as per Part 154 regulations. ENL teachers will attend professional developments in order to learn more about manipulating the EDAT, and they will host professional developments to turnkey the data to classroom teachers. After analyzing the EDAT, we determined that writing is a major weakness, therefore we decided to specifically strengthen our writing instruction. ENL teachers use small group instruction during integrated ENL writing classes, as well as integrating writing practice into stand-alone ENL classes. The ENL team has determined that we will target pushable students, who are approaching the next level of proficiency on the NYSESLAT, in our small group instruction. This involves encouraging students to attend the after-school program and the Saturday academy which will be funded with Title III funding. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We currently have a freestanding ENL program for students in grade K-5, with four full time licensed ELL teachers, one with a common branch license. We service a total of 153 students. Ell students at PS 76 speak ten languages; Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Fulani, Mandingo, Spanish, Twi, Tagalog, and Urdu. Students whose IEPs dictate so are serviced in self-contained classes or integrated co-teaching classes. Integrated and Standalone ENL will be implemented as per CR Part 154.2, with requirements for English as a New Language chart on page 24 of the English Language learner Policy and Reference Guide. Students may be grouped according to proficiency levels within the classes in which they are clustered. ENL teachers will push-in several times a week to the same class to work with different groups of students who are grouped according to their English proficiency levels. Students who are in self-contained or ICT classes will receive ENL instruction in the correct setting. All four ENL teachers provide push in and pull out services. These services are provided during reading, writing and phonics study based on the data analyzed on the EDAT. The number of minutes for push in and pull out services are based on the student proficiency levels b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? This year, we have four full-time ENL teachers. Great care is taken when scheduling ENL instruction at the beginning of the school year to ensure that all ELL students receive the mandated number of instructional minutes. For the coming academic year, we will organize the groupings and schedule according to proficiency level to ensure that we are in compliance with the mandated ENL minutes and in order to better meet the needs of our ELL students. For the coming academic year, we will adjust our schedule to include the mandated minutes of standalone and integrated ENL, using co-teaching with classroom teachers to provide content area instruction as required in the new regulations in CR Part 154. We currently have additional staff members currently attending classes and working toward TESOL certification. While all ENL instruction is given in English, we strive to use multiple methods to connect with the children in their native language. We use translated versions of the New York State Assessments in Spanish. We also hire DOE translators in Arabic, French, and other languages and as needed to assist students taking the test. Information about using Language Line Services was disseminated to all staff. The current ELA and Math programs we use provide resources in multiple languages to enhance the home-school connection. Arabic and Spanish speaking students are provided with glossaries for the math and science test if they choose to use them. We also have dictionaries in various languages accessible to all students. Two of the ESL teachers here at P.S. 76 speak some Spanish, and three speak some French, and two speak some Chinese. Those languages are called into service often to ease the way for brand-new students, or to act as a bridge to understanding English, or to communicate with parents. While none of the ESL teachers here speak Arabic, our teachers have made connections within the Arab community and have enlisted family volunteers who come to the school to help with translations and to help with acclimating new Arab students. We are able to access a selection of leveled readers in Spanish and French through our school’s subscription to Reading A-Z.com. We use these native language texts and their English counterparts to instruct those children who are literate in French or Spanish. Reading A-Z also offers an extensive collection of graphic organizers which help the ELLs with planning , classifying and writing information. There are also many picture-based activities which can be printed out to help those children in the beginning stages of learning English. We also have a lending library of English-Arabic and English-Spanish dictionaries which teachers use in classrooms with new ELLs. In the coming academic year, ENL teachers will make use of the SIOP model protocol to be sure that students receive comprehensible input and information to build background, including native language supports whenever possible or within the abilities of the ENL teachers or other school personnel. P.S. 76 is a diverse community, and the ESL teachers make every effort to not only honor that diversity but to celebrate it. Lively discussions in ESL often center around the customs and holidays of our students’ native cultures. Children are encouraged to discuss how their own families celebrate their family’s holidays here in New York, as well as back in their native land. Books are read describing the different cultural traditions, and students are encouraged to speak and write about their own cultural experiences. Recently our entire school embarked upon a unit of study about identity. All students were encouraged to relate to their family's culture as part of their identity. ENL teachers send the Technology Specialist our service provider Template with the data to be entered into STARS. All students are programmed accordingly. Each month the ENL teachers review the EDUR report to ensure compliance 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Within our Freestanding ENL model in which content is delivered in English, we are careful to align our lessons with the Common Core Learning Standards in each lesson. The SIOP Protocol will be used to develop academic language and make content comprehensible to our ELL students by including a language object as well as a content objective. In our school, we use the Go Math! program for our instruction in mathematics. Some of the materials and textbooks associated with this program are available in Spanish and are used by Spanish-speaking students to provide comprehensible content. In addition, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  there is an ELL component in each Go Math! lesson and that component and the ELL activities workbook are used to augment the lessons given when an ENL teacher pushes in to teach math in the classroom. During this academic year, much emphasis has been placed on explicit instruction. ENL teachers have received feedback on this facet of instruction as part of their observations and have worked with supervisors to become more proficient in explicit instruction. This type of instruction will greatly benefit ELLs due to its clarity and focus. In the coming academic year, ENL teachers will be co-teaching with classroom teachers to provide the required minutes of integrated ENL instruction. ENL and classroom teachers work together to target the same objectives. When our co-teaching program is fully in place, we will be planning together with classroom teachers and working as a team to provide comprehensible input and language development strategies to our ENL students while teaching core content. During pull out classes ENL teacher design thematic units integrating various content areas with relevant language objectives. By creating these units we can include more hands on learning at the Kindergarten level. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At the beginning of the year, all new students who are native Spanish speakers are given the Spanish LAB test. We use that data to determine if they have literacy in their native language. This information is relayed to the classroom teacher who may then use it to design appropriate instruction for the student. We use licensed, Spanish-speaking teachers to give the Spanish LAB. Throughout the year when necessary, we use Department of Education translators to translate state tests into Arabic, as needed. If the state test is available in a Spanish version, that test is also made available to Spanish-speaking students. ENL teachers and the Testing Coordinator collaborate to determine which students would benefit from translated tests and which students are more comfortable in taking the tests in English 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) At P.S. 76, instruction for ELLs is differentiated according to the needs of the students and the level of their proficiency in English. We currently do not have any children who have been designated as SIFE. If we do have any SIFE children admitted, we would take the following steps to ensure that the child is appropriately serviced as an ELL with interrupted formal education. ELLs who have been designated as SIFEs will be provided literacy support services, as appropriate, if their reading scores are below grade level. Guidance counselors are available to support the SIFE children, should they need special help in adjusting to the new school or their new country. b) Newcomers will receive scaffolded instruction which is appropriate to their needs. Our subscription to Reading A-Z.com provides many leveled readers in numerous foreign languages in addition to English. Dictionaries in English and the native languages, including picture dictionaries, are also provided for newcomers. The ELL teachers and other push-in support teachers, along with the classroom teachers, provide instruction in test-taking strategies to ELLs who must take the ELA exam after having been in this country for only one year. The ENL teachers will also work closely with these children to prepare them for the NYSESLAT exam, using workbooks which have been especially designed for practice in the speaking, writing, listening, and reading portions of the test. Where appropriate, some ELL students use a strategic guided reading program called the Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) program. Students in this program are offered intensive support and are taught in small groups. c) . For developing students, we try to focus on their writing as well as their reading and comprehension of academic non-fiction during classroom push in and pull out instruction. We hope to have after schools programs to try to give developing students extra attention to pass the NYSESLAT in the spring. d) We are aware that long-term ELLs are at risk for not finishing high school, and we strive to ensure that these students will receive the support and instruction they need in order to succeed. Several years ago, staff at P.S. 76 began a program to familiarize students with colleges. Teachers have posted college banners and signs outside their rooms with information about the colleges they attended and pictures of the college mascots. On Fridays, teachers wear a T-shirt or 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  sweatshirt with the emblem of the college or university they attended. Teachers are also encouraged to speak to their students about the colleges they attended. In this way, we hope to promote interest in pursuing a college education and to encourage our students to stay in school. In addition the EDAT generates a list of students who are in danger of becoming long-term ELLs. The EDAT also provides us with risk factors for each student to help us prevent them from becoming long-term ELLs. e) According to the revised CR Part 154, we do provide 90 minutes of integrated ENL instruction per week for two years after achieving the level of Commanding on the NYSESLAT. ENL teachers are assigned to assist classroom teacher with classes that have a large proportion of ELLs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? During the coming year, we plan to use the SIOP method to improve our instruction. ENL teachers will be pushing into self-contained classrooms to work very closely with classroom teachers, aligning instruction to the classroom teachers. We have implemented the Benchmark Literacy program in grades K-2 and Expeditionary Learning modules in grades 3-5. The instruction and accompanying materials lend themselves to differentiated instruction for our ELL- SWDs. The program provides ways to differentiate instruction for the ELL- SWDs without losing any rigor, while consistently engaging the students. The Benchmark program allows us to formulate questions that challenge, but do not frustrate, our students. In addition, each unit has individual books with different various F & P levels that correspond to our students’ reading levels. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? When pushing into the self-contained classroom, the ENL teachers work with very small groups (no more than four students, and usually fewer than that), allowing each student to receive a great deal of individualized instruction. We have found that pushing into self-contained classrooms allows instruction to continue smoothly and allows us to provide our ENL services in the least restrictive environment. ENL teachers with ELL-SWDs are familiar with the IEP goals of each student, and instruction is targeted to address the reading and writing goals on the IEP. Our school uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility in a variety of ways to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs. Depending on their individual needs and as stipulated in their IEPs, ELL-SWDs may also receive such services as occupational therapy, physical therapy, adaptive physical education, speech pathology, and individual and group counseling. Within the school, we have a Child Study Team, which meets on a regular basis to discuss the special needs of students who may be at risk or in need of services delivered in a self-contained classroom. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All instruction at our school is provided in English with some home language support when possible. Our school provides many instructional supports for our students. We will provide after school programs for students in grades 3 - 5 to prepare them for the state tests in ELA and Math. In addition, we will offer after school program to boost the reading and writing levels of our ELLs in preparation for the NYSESLAT exam. Another intervention used with ELLs at our school is the Leveled Literacy Intervention which is used both by our AIS personnel, Classroom Teachers, Paraprofessionals and ENL teachers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, we will be using the Spring Forward program to instruct our ELLs. This program includes academic vocabulary which is constantly reinforced throughout the lessons in a unit. The program makes use of SIOP-based instructional techniques, such as scaffolding techniques to make content comprehensible for ELLs. In addition to this, leveled texts for small group instruction and sentence frames are also widely used in the Spring Forward program; they provide practice in modeling appropriate grammar and English for the students. We will also continue to use the computer-based program, Imagine Learning to help students progress in acquiring English proficiency. Teachers and ENL teachers will be able to use this individualized program data to drive instruction for their ELL students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not discontinuing any programs/services for ELLs at our school. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are afforded equal access to school programs. ELL students are provided opportunities to participate in after school classes to make progress in Reading, Writing, Speaking and Listening. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Imagine Learning English is a research-based computer program that provides a comprehensive curriculum for children reading below the third-grade level. It is comprised of three core courses: Level One prepares students for beginning reading instruction by teaching print concepts, phonological awareness, letter recognition, letter sounds, simple decoding and vocabulary comprehension. Level Two teaches phonics, letter sounds, word recognition, vocabulary and reading comprehension. Level Three takes students from beginning reading to fluent reading and comprehension. This program supports the objectives of the Common Core Standards. All of our ELL students (in addition to some of our general education students) spend fifteen to twenty minutes each day in their general education classroom (not during their ENL instructional time) working with this program. Teachers are able to generate reports from the program about each student’s progress and areas of difficulty. They use this data to help inform their instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In both our push-in model and our pull-out program model, instruction is always given in English. Native language support also is available when newcomer LEPs with literacy skills in their original language are given independent reading materials in that language. Students taking certain assessments, such as the state math and science exams are able to take these exams in their native languages or with the assistance of an interpreter provided by the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit. For students who are instructed in English only, we try to use some home language words or phrases when possible to act as a bridge for learning between the two languages. Labels in English, Spanish, and Arabic, were printed and distributed to classroom teachers so that they could label items in their rooms to help the ELLs in making a connection between languages. Several students felt pride at seeing their home language displayed and commented favorably on the practice. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our push-in model for integrated ENL as well as our pull-out model for standalone ENL instruction will insure that our program supports the students in an age-appropriate and developmentally appropriate way. When ESL teachers push in to the classroom, the children remain in their own classroom where instruction is appropriate to the grade level and age of the students. When students are pulled out, they are grouped with students in their own language proficiency level, within their grade level. Second graders learn with second graders. Fifth graders learn with other fifth graders. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not applicable. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All newly enrolled ELLs are given an opportunity to meet with the ENL team and parents are invited to come to Parent Orientations to meet our Parent Coordinator and ENL team members. All students receive scaffolded instruction which is appropriate to their needs. Our subscription to Reading A-Z.com provides many leveled readers in numerous foreign languages in addition to English. Dictionaries in English and the native languages, including picture dictionaries, are also 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  provided for newcomers. The ENL teachers will also work closely with these children to prepare them for the NYSESLAT exam, using workbooks which have been especially designed for practice in the speaking, writing, listening, and reading portions of the test. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently we do not offer language electives to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for the ELL staff at PS 76 is ongoing. Weekly professional development is provided by our own school administration and focuses on topics of concern to all teachers, such as working with SESIS, creating formative assessments, understanding Danielson’s rubric, classroom management techniques, developing meaningful discussion in the classroom and differentiating instruction for children with varying needs. Since the start of this school year, ELL teachers have had the opportunity to attend numerous professional development sessions outside of our building. We have attended sessions offered by the R-BERN at Fordham University and others involving math instruction at CUNY. Other professional developments have been offered by UFT, including an all day event focused on ELLs. As part of this session, they addressed the information and resources available through the EDAT. Administration is currently working on sending ELL teachers to a professional development session solely to learn more about the EDAT to pinpoint and differentiate instruction. ELL teachers also plan on attending the District11 L-liaison meetings. Currently, our school is involved in a learning partners program with another school in Brooklyn. Teachers visit that school to improve instruction and study successful methods of achieving success for ELLs. In addition, one of the ENL teachers was designated as the school's Language Access Coordinator and will attend any future trainings on the responsibilities involved in that position. The ENL coordinator and pupil accounting secretary attended a professional development regarding ELL students and enrollment to make sure that staff is informed of the most recent and up-to-date rules and regulations for incoming students. ENL teachers received training on using the Spring Forward program and materials. Training was provided by a sales representative and educational consultant from Benchmark Literacy. Each year, in response to the changing nature of the NYSESLAT, ESL teachers receive instruction on new facets of the administration of this assessment. This instruction usually includes training in how to score the Writing portion of the exam. The ELL team will request to turn key their professional development to the staff so that they can meet their professional development requirements. The ELL team will also provide professional development to staff during which we address specific ELL strategies, planning, and modifications for ELLs, focusing on integrating language and content instruction. Each time we hold a professional development activity, we take attendance and provide an agenda handout to all attendees. Each staff member will be reminded to record their professional development hours on their own personal tracking form. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school has a Professional Development team which meets to design professional development sessions for all staff. In planning professional development for the coming academic year, this team will take into account the new professional development requirements for ENL teachers and for all teachers as per CR Part 154.2 and plan professional development in the school accordingly. At all professional development sessions held at the school, an attendance list is circulated for teachers to sign. Agendas are either circulated in paper form or displayed on a Smart Board. Records of professional development are kept by Administration and by the individual teacher who records the information for his/her own professional development record. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our plan for 2018-19 is for our ENL providers and teachers of ELLs to meet with parents of their ELL students on a one-to-one basis during our Tuesday afternoon parent involvement block. We will begin meeting with parents soon after the school year begins, in order to provide them with the most up-to-date information as to how their child(ren) performed on the NYSESLAT. We will give them what information is made available to us as to their progress from last year’s NYSESLAT to this year’s NYSESLAT. We will discuss scores and strengths and weaknesses in all four modalities as measured by the NYSESLAT. We will inform parents of our instructional goals, and which areas need to be targeted. During these conferences, we will also make parents aware of the importance of their roles in supporting their child(ren) at home by checking homework and reading with them. We will also make them aware of parent engagement Tuesdays so that they are aware of our availability should they have questions at any point during the year. We will give parents information as to the changing nature of our ENL instruction to include both push-in and pull-out instruction, and we will introduce parents to our instructional materials. In the case of kindergarten and other students new to New York where no NYSESLAT scores are available, we will inform them of their child’s level based on the results of the NYSITELL and the Spanish LAB, if applicable, and explain their scores in all four modalities. At the one-to-one conferences, we plan to use the translation services of the Translation Unit’s telephone translators to conduct interviews in parents’ native languages where it is appropriate. These meetings will be separate and distinct form the mandated ENL parent orientation meetings and the parent-teacher conferences which are a regular part of the DOE calendar. The annual individual meetings with ELL parents will be documented on a form which will be collaboratively developed by the members of the ENL teacher team. This form will include areas to document in-person meetings, phone calls, letters, and any involvement of the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Copies of the form will be retained in the pocket folders for each student in the ELL Compliance binder 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At P.S. 76, we are proud of the interest level, enthusiasm, and involvement of our ENL parent population. ENL parents enjoy attending PTA meetings where translation is provided for them, as needed. We have an active PTA team of school personnel who plan, organize, and attend the meetings on a monthly basis. Topics of this year's meetings will include fitness and health, how to help your child using math and ENL strategies, a Halloween celebration with safety tips, a March Madness event with a basketball team composed of faculty and parents, and a multi-cultural celebration of holiday customs around the world. There are numerous performances throughout the school year that parents are encouraged to attend. These include the 5th grade band concert and the Spring Concerts, where they actively attend and encourage their students perform. We have also had many parents of ELLs volunteer to attend field trips. We have allocated our Title III immigrant monies to developing parent workshops with the support of a community organization CEI. This year, we are offering an ENL Parent Handbook to the families of our ELLs. This handbook contains useful information about our school, such as pick-up and drop-off information, pictures and titles of administrative staff, and contact information. All pages in the handbook contain brightly colored illustrations and little text. We plan to have this handbook 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  translated into the languages of our parents and to share this handbook with them in the fall. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Darlene Teron, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Bennington School School DBN: 11x076 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Darlene Teron Title Principal Candice Pantano Assistant Principal Gloria Peralta Parent Coordinator Penelope McKown ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ignraya Lopez Parent Joanne Angelillo Teacher/Subject Area Jeffrey Steinberg Teacher/Subject Area Alessandra Rodrigues Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Bennington School Superintendent: M DBN: 11x076 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Penelope McKown ENL Coordinator Gloribel Peralta Parent Coordinator Maritza Conklin Pupil Accounting Secretary Pantano Candice Assistant Principal Will be scheduled in November 2018 Will be scheduled in November 2018 Will be scheduled in November 2018 Will be scheduled in November 2018 Yes No No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1. Before beginning the interview process with a parent, the ENL teacher asks about the preferred language of the parent. If needed, the ENL teacher uses the Parent's Guide to Language Access brochure for help in determining 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  the preferred language. The ENL teacher then gives HLIS forms to the parent in the preferred language. The ENL teacher also makes sure that the preferred language is entered into Part III of the HLIS form, so that it becomes a part of the student's permanent record. 2 . Various ATS reports are used to gain information about language preferences in our parent community. We frequently run the RLAT report and the RLER report to be sure that our ELLs have been properly assessed. If we don't see a student's name on those reports, we check to be sure that the student's Home Language has been correctly entered into ATS. We are careful to instruct the office staff and ENL teachers on the correct designations for Home Languages, so that clerical errors can be avoided. The RCPL report and the RAPL report provide information about the parents' preferences as to what languages should be used in both written and spoken communication. Finally, the RPOB report gives us information about the birth place of the student, which can also provide clues to the family's home language. 3. The Student Emergency Contact card also provides information about the parent's preferred language of communication in both written and oral information coming from the school. This information is included as well in Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey. During our intake conversations with parents, we inform them that translations are available through the Department of Education, and that they can receive letters home from school in the language of their choice. We tell the parents of newly admitted students that their child's teacher has access to a telephone interpretation system and that language should not be a barrier to communication between teacher and parent. 4. To find out more information about our parents' preferred languages, we will distribute the Language Access Parent Survey to our families. This survey will allow us to gain a better understanding of how satisfied our parents are with the language services provided by the school. With this survey, parents will rate their satisfaction with over-the-phone and in-person interpreters used to help them in the school setting. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Araucanian Bengali Bihari Chinese English Ew Fante French 2 33 1 1 1 1 666 0 1 3 0.24 3.8 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 78.26 0 0.12 0.36 2 32 0 1 1 1 664 1 1 3 0.24 3.76 0 0.12 0.12 0.12 78.03 0.12 0.12 0.36 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  Spanish Twi Urdu 139 1 6 16.33 0.12 0.72 144 1 6 16.92 0.12 0.72 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A as per the RAPL report, generated 10/15/18. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Documents relating to the identification, assessment, and parent notification of English Language Learners - Home Language Information Surveys, Entitlement Letters, Non-Entitlement Letters, Parent Survey and Program Selection Forms, and Placement Letters ongoing How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Already available in translation to covered DOE languages on DOE website; for parents whose languages are not covered, staff will use Language Line to convey information to parents. ENL Parent Handbooks once yearly T&I Unit Parent Notification Letters - Parent Teacher Conferences, Promotion in Doubt Letters, HIV/AIDS Parent Notification Letters, Letters Announcing School Holidays, school calendars, Chancellor's Backpacked Notices Parent Notification Letters/Flyers - Announcements of after school programs, information about state testing dates, other school policies and procedures, PTA/SLT meetings, invitations to social events at the school such as school carnivals, Coffee Fridays, ENL Parent Teas, parent gatherings for parents whose children are newly arrived to the country. ongoing ongoing Already available in translation to covered languages on DOE website; for parents whose languages are not covered, staff will use Language Line to convey information to parents. T&I Unit, bilingual staff may assist in translating; when planning, we will need to note the time needed for T&I to translate. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Forms to be used by the parents to provide school with information about their families - Admissions/Re-admissions/Transfer forms, Residency Questionnaires, Parent Student Ethnic Identification Forms, Emergency Contact Cards, Field Trip Forms, Media Consent Forms at time of enrollment, ongoing Already available 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Registration of New Students ongoing ENL Parent Orientations within first ten days of school, and then ongoing IEP Meetings ongoing Once yearly meetings with parents of ELLs at least once a year Back to School Night (Curriculum Night) September interpretation service(s)? Pupil Accounting Secretary, Parent Coordinator, and other school personnel can translate in Spanish; for other languages, we use Language Line (and the Hello Parent phone script). We also use forms translated into various languages to aid in parent comprehension. For these meetings, we use Language Line (and the Hello Parent phone script), school personnel, and interpreters hired through the DOE. On occasion, parent volunteers also translate. Parents will watch a video in the nine covered languages and use forms translated into those languages. If parents have other language needs, we will use Language Line. School staff may provide interpretation; Language Line may also be utilized; interpreters from the DOE may also be hired to assist parents at IEP meetings. We use school staff, Language Line (and the Hello Parent phone script), and parent volunteers to interpret. To reach parents in their native languages, to inform them about the meetings, we use an automated school messenger service that translates messages into the languages used by 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Parent Teacher Conferences November 15, March 14, and May 15 Parent Engagement Time on Tuesday Afternoons ongoing our parents; school staff and parent volunteers may also assist. Interpretation will be provided by school staff, parent volunteers, and Language Line (and the Hello Parent phone script). In addition, on-site interpreters may be hired through the DOE. Interpretation will be provided by school staff, parent volunteers, and Language Line. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, we will use the automated School Messenger service to contact parents in their native languages. If families use languages that are not covered by School Messenger, we will the use the Language Line over the phone interpretation services to reach out to them. Training our staff on the use of Language Line will increase their awareness of this resource and how it could be best used in an emergency situation. We will also work to make sure that teachers are aware of the languages used by the families of the students in their class. Information from the RAPL and RCPL reports will be shared with teachers to give them this knowledge. This information will aid teachers in requesting help from an interpreter in the event of a school emergency. This is a new procedure for our school and we are working to have it fully in place by December 2018. Our front office staff will be trained in using the Language Line "Hello Parent" phone script. Using this procedure, family members will provide only their names and languages when calling the school. When office staff hear this information, they will know to contact Language Line to seek an interpreter to assist the family in the native language. This is a new procedure for our school and we are working to have it fully in place by December 2018. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At the beginning of the school year, each teacher receives a CD of the Chancellor's Regulations. In addition, members of the school's Language Access Team will attend trainings conducted by the Field Language Access Coordinator so that they may turnkey this information to all school staff. The ENL Coordinator and ENL teachers will provide a Monday afternoon professional development session in which they will make staff members familiar with Language Line and how to utilize this service. We will demonstrate an actual phone call made to Language Line so that staff may see how easy it is to use this valuable service. We will also train front office staff in how to use these resources. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  This year, rather than one Language Access Coordinator, we will have a team of personnel responsible for language access in the school. This team will consist of an Assistant Principal, ENL Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, and Pupil Accounting Secretary. Team members will attend a training offered by the Field Language Access Coordinator in November. The Language Access Team will be fully trained and able to turnkey information to the staff in the school. Our efforts to educate our staff on the use of Language Line have paid off. According to the School Language Access Report, the number of Language Line calls from P.S. 76 have increased from 28 calls in 2016-2017 ro 161 calls in 2017-2018. We hope to continue to educate our staff and to better serve our parents' needs by increasing the number of calls in the coming year. To make staff members aware of the value of their knowledge of languages other than English, we will distribute the School Staff Language Survey and keep the completed surveys on file so that we will have access to the languages spoken and read by our staff. In addition, the ENL staff writes a weekly column in the school newspaper. We will use this column to provide information about how to find translated resources, how to request a translation of a document, and how to use the over the phone interpretation service. Information about translation and interpretation services is sent to all staff several times a year through this medium. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are made aware of the services of the Translation and Interpretation Unit through publicly posted notices in many languages within and around the school building. Brightly colored posters are situated in the lobby and right outside the main office so that parents can see that our school values translation and interpretation for all families. We also keep the Bronx Field Support Center Over-the-Phone Interpreter Services Desk Aid on the counter in our main office and in the school library. In addition, at our ENL Parent Teas, we will inform parents of the Language Line interpretation and hope to stage a demo so that parents can be aware of how this demonstration of how this service can help them in communicating with school personnel. The same information could be disseminated at Back to School Night and at PTA meetings. Depending on the needs of the parents, letters are translated into a variety of home languages and in-person interpreters are hired as necessary. Parents may also indicate that they need interpreters through written communication with the school. Teachers are aware that translated documents can be found at the Translation and Interpretation Unit's section of the DOE website, so when they need specific translations for a field trip, for example, they know to look there. The Language Line "Hello Parent" phone script will also help a great deal in informing parents about how to communicate with the school. By using this phone script, school personnel can make sure that parents know about interpretation services that are available to them through Language Line. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  We will review the data from the our Learning Surveys distributed to all families in the spring. We will initiate using the Language Access Parent Surveys to give us more specific information about the language services that parents feel they need. These surveys give us valuable feedback about how parents believe we are serving their needs as members of the school community. When we have our yearly meetings with ELL parents, we will be including targeted learning surveys (translated into appropriate languages) which will provide us with information about what parents think about our ENL program. Finally, we have a School Leadership Council, which meets monthly with the school administration. The parent volunteers on this committee change from year to year, but are often bilingual and are able to provide informal feedback on how we are meeting the language needs of the children and parents in our school. We will also use the Language Access Parent Survey which has been translated into the nine covered languages. If parents need other languages, we will ask Language Line personnel to read the documents to them in the appropriate language. We will then record the responses after they have been translated into English. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81 
