2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X080 School Name: J.H.S. 080 THE MOSHOLU PARKWAY Principal: EMMANUEL POLANCO 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information JHS Mosholu Parkway Middle School 80 School Number (DBN): 10X080 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 321000010080 6-8 Grades 149 Mosholu Parkway 718-405-6300 718-405-6370 Fax: Epolanco2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: Phone Number: School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Kari Kraus, CSD Emmanuel Polanco John Perez SilviaLugo Emmanuel Polanco Juan Lazala District Information Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Maribel Hulla-Torres Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718) 741-5852 Phone Number: (718) 741-7098 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: One Fordham Plaza, rm 801 Bronx, NY JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 741-3362 Phone Number: 718) 741-7763 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Emmanuel Polanco John Perez Silvia Lugo Frances Hoffman Juan Lazala Kari Kraus N/A N/A Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Tania Liriano Carolina Ortiz Vivian Ramos Rosemary Savery Ines Cosme Represented Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor PARENT PARENT PARENT UFT STAFF UFT STAFF Member/ Member/ Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. JHS Mosholu Parkway Middle School 80 School Mission Statement: Our mission is to empower students with 21st century skills that prepares them for secondary education, careers in engineering, and the performing arts. We cultivate a learning community that transforms teaching and learning through the integration of technology. Together as a team, we strive for excellence. School Contextual Information: The JHS Mosholu Parkway Middle School 80 represents a diverse learning community with 19 different languages and about 680 students from grades 6 through 8. The school's population comprises 13% Black, 67% Hispanic, 5% White, and 13% Asian students. The student body includes 34% English language learners and 25% special education students. Boys account for 57% of the students enrolled and girls account for 43%. Our school’s beliefs around how students learn best: 1. Safety and Well being - Students learn best when the learning environment is physically, psychologically, and emotionally safe. They thrive when their uniqueness is valued, their contributions respected, and the culture for learning encourages taking intellectual risks. Students feel safe when they have at least one responsive adult that they could reach out to for help. 2. Student-to-Student discussions-Students learn best when they engage in high quality discussions, ask high quality questions, and extend each others’ understanding by challenging or building on each other’s contributions. 3. Productive Struggle Students learn best when they engage in activities that are both cognitively challenging and accessible. They thrive when given tools, resources, and multiple opportunities to achieve desired outcomes.They excel when they are given opportunities to apply feedback and improve their work products. 4. Individualized Standards-Based Feedback-Students learn best when they receive immediate, specific feedback on their performance. They learn best when they understand the standards and task specific criteria used to assess their work. They excel when given a sample or model of the work expected in addition to explicit directions. 5. Technology accelerates and enhances learning- We believe that technology is an important tool for the delivery of instruction and enhances teaching and learning. Students learn best when the teacher effectively uses technology to differentiate the instructional delivery, when technology is used as a learning tool and is made readily available as a resource. They learn best when given opportunities to incorporate technology in developing their work products, are taught how to use digital sources responsibly, and are given self-directed digital tools that enhance or extend their understandings beyond the classroom. 6. Students’ Active Learning -Students learn best when they are active participants in both the teaching and learning processes inside and outside the classroom. It is important that students do the heavy lifting in every lesson, while 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  receiving varied types/levels of support from teacher and peers. They excel when they are involved in developing criteria and their own next steps. 7. Coherence and Consistency Supports Student Learning- Students learn best when teachers plan coherently, make interdisciplinary connections, and support learning through a consistent set of best practices across all classrooms. 8. Evidence Based Arguments-Students learn best when given the opportunity to present evidence based claims, ideas, and arguments that relate to real world, make cultural connections, and connect with prior knowledge. This skill set transfers to math and literacy, which further supports college and career readiness. Framework for Great Schools Progress Supportive Environment -Our school has built upon the past three years to further strengthen our school-wide PBIS program. We’ve expanded the implementation to include a school store, class section sheets, weekly class rewards, monthly student awards ceremonies, special incentive trips, and school spirit week. This year we continue to build upon this expansion by consistently improving the quality of each of the listed components. We’ve put together a student government that oversees the sections sheets, cafeteria board games, community service, mouse squad, reading club, senior activities, and grade level celebrations. Through fruitful partnerships with Center for Supportive Schools, Astor Mental Health Clinic, Renaissance Music Program, and The Greys Cadets, our school has been able to attain gradual progress in the element of supportive environment. These additional offerings have positively impacted the “school’” experience for all students. We will continue to empower student government to engage in school- wide decision-making processes.  In partnership with Center for Supportive Schools, we’ve included Dance, Music, Theater, and Visual Arts in the program offering for all students. These electives are taught in specially designed spaces that create an authentic learning environment and which allow for a serious exploration of the career possibilities within each of the Performing Arts. The programmatic design along with the designated spaces allows for parallel scheduling and student choice. Our newly built computer lab will be used as a designated space for engineering courses which includes robotics, coding, and programming.  Our school is currently represented by 19 different languages. Historically, MS80 receives many students that are newcomers to the country throughout the year. Many of them encounter culture shock, anxiety, and a variety of challenges. As a result, we will create 2-3 new comers’ classes to support students with acclimating, assimilating, and transitioning. Rigorous Instruction - Met benchmark for ELA for 2017 - Revised Common Core Aligned Programs and Curricula for all Core Content Areas - Pacing Calendars and Common Assessments were administered throughout the year, allowing for curriculum adjustments and targeted interventions. - AIS Intervention has been embedded during the day for all students. - A newly established “Accelerated Track” has also provided students at grade level with additional opportunities to challenge themselves and push to higher academic achievement levels. This includes Regents track classes and Specialized High School Exam preparation provided by Kaplan and Princeton Review. Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  - There are four grade- subject meetings and 1 interdisciplinary team meeting built in teacher schedules. - Hired Peer Collaborative Teachers and Model Teachers to coach and support coherent implementation and data analysis for each core content area. Teachers will continuously work together in grade level subject teams to map and calendar out curriculum on Google Apps for Education’s “Docs”, which will be shared with all teachers. - Professional learning designed and implemented to support differentiated teacher team needs. - Hire an Instructional Technology Teacher Coach to support all teachers on how to effectively integrate technology into curricula, use digital tools that support multi-media student work products, and establish digital portfolios for every student. Framework for Great schools in Need of Improvement: Effective leadership - Establishing strong data gathering systems to assess impact of all initiatives, program, partnerships, and strategically targeted areas of the school as they relate to students’ achievement. - Hold periodic Town Hall Meetings with teachers to engage in open dialogue about what is going well and what needs improvements. The information and recommendations will be used to problem solve with school’s extended cabinet. - Create systems and structures that support new teachers, including assigning specific designated coaches that will provide job-embedded coaching at least 2 days a week in no more than a 1:3 Coach-to-Teacher ratio. - Effective and highly effective teachers will receive job-embedded support 2 days a week through dedicated coaching in no more than a 1:3 Coach-to-Teacher ratio. The focus will be on the integration of technology, the effective use of digital tools, and the transition to multimedia student- work products. These coaches will be from TEQ, iReady, Apple, and other partners that support the engineering courses. Strong Family and Community Ties - We need to improve the level of parent engagement by increasing parental involvement, participation in school workshops, attendance in parent teacher conferences, and school environment surveys. - We will continue to build on our Saturday’s ENL Parent Academy and offer other courses based on need as well. For example parents have expressed a need for Citizenship, Computer, and GED classes. - As a way to proactively engage families in our community starting in 5th grade, we will foster a closer relationship with our 3 top feeder schools. We will open up some of our Saturday programs to 5th graders from our feeder schools including, but not limited to our ENL, Grey Cadets, and SHSAT Prep programs. As a RISE School, we will begin (or expand) implementation of the following school improvement strategies during the upcoming 2018-19 school year: ● Expanded-learning opportunities will be provided to all students, including additional instructional time after-school, Saturdays, and summer enrichment opportunities. All students below grade level in ELA will receive a minimum of 90 minutes of Reading and Writing intervention during AIS .  In addition to Reading and Writing interventions, all students below grade level in Math will receive targeted support for a minimum of 90 minutes a week, according to individual needs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16   AIS is offered to about 250 students 5 days a week and on Saturdays in addition to the mandatory renewal    hour. Students will be flexibly grouped in homogeneous and heterogeneous groupings according to special needs and performance levels. Students that are new comers and/or entering English Language Learners are also provided with additional support through targeted support during ELT. For students performing at grade level, they will be offered accelerated Regents track courses, technology-based Engineering courses (Robotics, Coding, and Programming), and Performing Arts electives. ● As per the mandatory renewal hour for all students, the school will allocate 60 minutes per day, five days a week at the end of the school day, to increase instructional time for all students. For students performing below grade level in ELA and Math, this time will focused on reading and writing across the curriculum in the areas of ELA, Science, and Social Studies. In Math, this time will be used to build Math fluency. Students will use digital tools, conferencing strategies, and lessons designed by teachers based on the results of the periodic assessments and their performance on identified key standards. The impact of our ELT will be measured through student performance in key standards and Lexile Growth (tracked through Achieve 3000), Khan Academy, iReady, and other digital tools. ● Our Community School Model has provided student and family access to physical and mental health services in addition to other social-emotional supports made available in the school. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X080 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 691 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 85 85 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 54 44 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 88.0% % Reduced Lunch 33.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 68.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.45 14% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 31.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YSH NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes N/A 47 47 27 92.8% 2.5% 22.7% 12.9% 12.7% 0.9% 6 27% 7.4 20.5% 23% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YSH NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection on Rigorous Instruction: ● A comprehensive CCLS digital curriculum is available in all core content areas; teacher teams will incorporate technology and the arts into the core curriculum. Horizontal teacher teams will meet at least 4 times a week to determine pacing and adjust the curriculum to meet the needs of ELLs and SPED students. ● All culminating authentic tasks will be derived from the CCLS aligned curricula (My Perspectives (ELA), Go Math, U.S. History and American History (SS), and Interactive Science (SCI) and teachers will develop targeted supports for special populations and individual students during teacher team meetings. ● Digital Learning tools such as Newsela, MyOn, eScience, Khan Academy, and formative assessment data collected by teachers will be used to inform instructional planning and appropriately target students’ standards-based needs. ● Performing Arts teachers will implement curricula that integrate core content areas and supports interdisciplinary CCLS. Through a partnership with Center for Supportive Schools, all students will be offered at least 2 choices in Performing Arts within the each year. The performing arts of Dance, Theater, Music, and Visual Arts will be offered in designated spaces equipped to create authentic learning experiences in each of these arts offerings. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  ● Teachers will work collaboratively to identify benchmark assessments aligned to CCLS, content curricula, and State’s summative assessments. ● Students will be provided with a standards-based progress report six times during the academic year aligned to the marking periods. Areas of need:  Rigorous Instruction: Critical Key Finding 1. SEC data indicates that time spent on implementation of topics and skills is inconsistent with Common Core State Standards (CCSS) expectations. Based on the feedback from DTSDE, QR, Co-Interpretation, and student performance on last years State ELA assessment, we have identified specific standards as our Key Standards to monitor throughout the year. We have developed a professional learning plan and teacher meeting schedule that targets support for staff to address the key standards identified amongst other foci. Student Performance Data Trends ELA 2017-18: Performance in Standard RI.2 ●RI.6.2 - Key Ideas and Details Grade 6 - 49% (61% for City) ●RI.6.2 - Key Ideas and Details Grade 7 -42% (54% for City) ●RI.7.2 - Key Ideas and Details Grade 8- 66% (71% for City Recommendations from the 2015 DTSDE Review that will continue to be implemented and expanded during the 2018-19 school year: ● Continue to develop the Teacher Individualized Support Plan tool to provide teachers consistent feedback and support in delivering quality instruction. This document will integrate and monitor multiple points of data for teachers: Administrative recommendations, professional development learning, teacher reflection, lead teacher recommendations, periodic assessment data. ● Provide teachers with comprehensive professional learning opportunities that are directly aligned to instructional practices. The professional learning will be provided in a job-embedded workshop model, to enhance application. Professional learning will focus on: implementation of curriculum, creating authentic learning experiences, integration of technology in the creation of dynamic learning experiences, standard based assessment measures, creating opportunities for students to self/peer assess, and facilitating high level discussions amongst students. ● The grading structure will be revised to ensure to provide students with improved feedback on their performance and progress. Progress reports will include intervention supports and their level of effectiveness. Additionally, ensuring increased accuracy of the reports. ● The school will implement a research-based protocol for teachers to use in analyzing student data. Teachers will use the analysis to plan and adjust instruction to meet to meet the needs of the students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Instructional Focus If teachers implement literacy-based instructional tasks with multiple entry points across all content areas, then students will develop critical thinking and problem solving skills. The School Leaders, Instructional Coaches, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and Model Teachers will support the quality implementation of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Teachers will ensure that unit and lesson plans introduce complex materials that stimulate higher-order thinking and build deep conceptual understanding and knowledge around specific content. Teachers will plan lessons that engage students in challenging tasks and higher order thinking aligned to Depth of Knowledge level 3 and 4 . Instructional task expectations will be at grade level for all students but will extend time for completion and allow differentiated supports for students with IEPs and for those who are ELLs. At least twice a year, students will work on challenging interdisciplinary tasks that engage them in authentic project-based learning experiences with an authentic audience . How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? To support this school wide instructional focus, a Common Core aligned curriculum will continue to be implemented in all subject areas. ELA teachers (6-8) will implement "My Perspectives" by Pearson and Teachers' College Writing curricula, Math teachers (6-8) will implement "Go Math" by Houghton Mifflin, Social Studies teaches (6-8) will implement "U.S. History" and "American History," by Pearson, and Science teachers (6-8) will implement the Common Core "Interactive Science" curriculum by Pearson. All students will have access to additional curriculum supports through digital tools such as Achieve3000, Light Sail, eScience, TenMarks, and IXL. Rosetta Stone will support new arrivals and students who need language development instruction in English. All teachers will teach through the use of technology and allow students to learn at their own pace. Teachers will share their lessons, resources, and feedback with students through the use of digital platforms such as “Google Classroom, SKEDULA, and Google Apps for Education Additional interventions will be based on students' needs according their IEP, ELL status, reading, and/or mathematical level. Teachers will engage in common planning activities for interdisciplinary and core instructional planning. Teachers will share best practices and identify a set of consistent practices across interdisciplinary teams. Students will be engaged in small group instruction, problem solving, academic discussions, and real-life instructional tasks. Teachers will offer students choice in tasks and will allow students to demonstrate their learning through multimedia presentations, digital portfolios, and self-paced digital learning platforms. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? To complement this curriculum and instructional vision, the creation of a dedicated space for STEM activities will support student academic achievement both during the school day as well as during ELT. Our school has been engaged in STEM Professional Development and Coaching. Our ELT model blends school staff with community partners, and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  provides a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, and physical activity. Moreover, to ensure that program activities are useful and significant to students, staff members and school administrators capital upgrades will support the quality of STEM instructional practices. Curricula in place for the 2018-19 school year have the following elements in place ELA, Social Studies, and Science Shift 1 - Balanced Informational and Literary Text  All curricula has text embedded that required for student analysis  The instructional focus ensures that students are reading and writing through text daily  All ELA, SS, and SCI teachers have an independent reading/guided read class 4 times a week, in addition to their content areas classes. This adds an additional layer of reading with feedback through teacher conferencing structures. Shift 3 - Staircase of Complexity  The ELA curriculum provides students/teachers with selections of leveled texts that are selected based on student ability to provide an appropriate challenge.  Digital tools across all content areas provide texts at different lexile levels to appropriate engage and challenge students. Shift 4 - Text Based Answers  Across all disciplines students are required to engage in text and analyze text through citation of textual evidence. Shift 5 - Writing to Sources  All lessons require reading and writing to occur daily. The writing is dependent on the reading selection for the lesson. Math Shift 1 - Focus  The curriculum and instructional model used are designed to move student thorough tiered tasks that culminate in real-world higher order thinking questions. The initial task address fundamental operations and after establishing this foundation students progress to more challenging tasks. Shift 3 - Fluency  The use of digital tools allows students to rapidly engage and receive feedback on their performance. Cycles are created for fundamental and standard-based problem solving. Shift 4 - Deep Understanding  The highest level in the tiered task protocol and performance assessments require students to engage in solving multi-step real-world problems that challenge students to think critically. This presents students with the opportunity to completely explore the concepts and skills contained in each standard. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? Using multiple entry points teachers are able to appropriately challenge all students in their classes. High performing students are able to demonstrate mastery and are able to move forward in the curriculum or able to explore content through alternate means. Digital tools facilitate the ability for teachers to differentiate for all students. The school has Academic Intervention Services built into the school day. Twice a week, students in the lowest 1/3rd of each class receive reading intervention. Everybody is Reading - This is a school-wide initiative in which all students engage independent/guided reading for 4 periods a week. Expanded Learning Time The school will allocate 60 minutes per day, five days a week at the end of the school day, to increase instructional time for all students. This time will focus on reading and writing across the curriculum in the areas of ELA, Science, and Social Studies. In Math, this time will be used to build Math fluency. The ELA curriculum is non-fiction text with a focus on comprehension strategies, which will be done through the use of iReady and the lessons provided through the application. Students will also use the digital tools with lessons as assigned by teachers and based on the results of the periodic assessments and their performance on specific key standards. The impact of our ELT will be measured through student performance in key standards and Lexile Growth (tracked through iReady). What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Teachers use assessment data to identify instructional groups of students. Using digital tools teachers are able to provide students with targeted supports that provide students with immediate feedback on their performance. These tools allow students to engage in learning activities that allow for: learning at an individual pace, text that is scaffolded by Lexile, and receiving individualized feedback on performance. These tools allow teachers to engage all groups in appropriately leveled work, while rotating to work with individuals or groups. Additionally, teachers use differentiation strategies to allow students to have choice and ownership within their learning. Teachers use assessment data to identify instructional groups of students. Using digital tools teachers are able to provide students with targeted supports that provide students with immediate feedback on their performance. These tools allow students to engage in learning activities that allow for: learning at an individual pace, text that is scaffolded by Lexile, and receiving individualized feedback on performance. These tools allow teachers to engage all groups in appropriately leveled work, while rotating to work with individuals or groups. Additionally, teachers use differentiation strategies to allow students to have choice and ownership within their learning. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Teachers are tiered into differentiated groups based on professional interests, strengths and needs. Each group will receive targeted professional learning tailored to support their development in addressing the instructional foci, meeting students’ unique needs, and ability to deliver culturally responsive instruction. Through learning walks and observations, teachers will be grouped and partnered, and further supported with administration, colleagues and consultants, to enhance classroom practice. Additionally, through the use of assessments cycles, teachers will analyze common student work products to identify trends in teaching and learning. Staff will identify an analyzing student work protocol, that will foster understanding of pedagogy, remediation, and differentiation, to enhance both teacher practice and student outcomes. The support for this inquiry cycle will be differentiated by grade and content, and aligned with expertise available to the school. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. During the 2018-19 academic year, all teachers will implement Common Core aligned literacy instructional tasks across all content areas with multiple entry points for diverse learners which will result in an overall increase in ELA proficiency by a minimum of 10% and an overall improvement in Math proficiency by a minimum of 10%, as measured by the 2019 ELA and Math State exams. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average Math Proficiency - Goal: by the 2017-18 SY - 2.31 Status - Good Standing Average ELA Proficiency - Goal: by the 2017-18 SY - 2.49* Status - Good Standing Performance Index on State Math Exam - Goal: 70 by the 2017-18 SY - 70 Status - Good Standing 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teacher teams will meet at least two times weekly in order to monitor the Reading and Writing Common Core alignment of instructional tasks across Science, Social Studies, and English Language Arts. In addition, ELA, Science, and Social Studies teachers will meet once a week to “look at student work” in order to monitor student learning and inform revision of instructional units.and related tasks to include appropriate supports and scaffolds for students at risk: Reading for Informational Text-Key Ideas and Details (RI.1-RI.3) and Reading for Literature Key Ideas and Details (RL.1-RL.3) Professional Development provided by TEQ, Pearson, Apple, Digital Age, to teachers across all subjects/grades focused on developing structures for creating multiple entry points to Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ELA, Science, Social Studies teachers, and all students Average ELA Proficiency September 2018 to June 2019 Peer Collaborative teachers, Instructional coaches, and Assistant Principals Average Math Proficiency Performance Index on Math State Exam September 2018 to June 2019 The Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, and Select group of Teachers Peer Collaborative teachers, Instructional coaches, a select group of teachers Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Instructional Rounds -identifying the effectiveness in the implementation of instructional practices Meeting Minutes Periodic Assessment Results Performance Assessment Results Instructional Rounds -identifying the effectiveness in the implementation of instructional practices 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  provide equal access to all students. Performance Index on Math State Exam Evaluative teacher observations This select group of teachers will support their teacher teams in aligning Instructional Tasks to Reading and Writing Common Core Standards and integrating technology with appropriate scaffolds and supports. Our technology equipped conference room is used to engage teachers in Professional Learning and accommodate a community of learners. This room is used for our students, staff, and parents to immerse themselves in learning through the use of technology. A target of 60 students performing at a high 2 range have been strategically grouped for core instruction and taught by the Math and ELA instructional coaches, who have demonstrated prior success with moving students at this range up to grade level performance. Tasks designed to address instruction for this group include appropriate supports. All students will receive standards based student report cards in ELA to reflect a quarterly update that will identify progress 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  trends in the key standards: Reading for Informational Text-Key Ideas and Details (RI.1-RI.3) and Reading for Literature Key Ideas and Details (RL.1-RL.3) All students will receive standards based student report cards in ELA to reflect a quarterly update that will identify progress trends in the key standards: Reading for Informational Text-Key Ideas and Details (RI.1-RI.3) and Reading for Literature Key Ideas and Details (RL.1-RL.3) 6 and 7th grade ELA and Math students below grade level will receive standards-based instruction including tasks that include additional supports. They will be instructed in groups of no more than 20 students. The AIS support will be included in their day program and offered on Saturdays. Principal support (during retreats, teacher coaching and mentorship); leadership will receive a theoretical foundation of instructional strategies to differentiate instruction for students, teachers then receive practical implementation through coaching in a cycle of professional learning, class lab sites, inter visitations, and September 2018 to June 2019 School leaders, Instructional Coaches, and teachers All teachers Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency Performance Index on Math State Exam ELA and Math Teachers Average ELA Proficiency September 2018 to June 2019 The Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, and Select group of Teachers Average Math Proficiency Performance Index on Math State Exam The Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, and Select group of Teachers, educational consultant Leadership and teachers Average ELA Proficiency September 2018 to June 2019 Average Math Proficiency Performance Index on Math State Exam Assessment of standards based mastery and growth within standards, as recorded on the report cards. Student improvement assessed through the i-Ready Periodic Assessment Observations Meeting Minutes Periodic Assessment Results 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  PLC (provided by Generation Ready, Metamorphosis, Advanced Literacy) Professional development to integrate technology tools to support differentiation, Teacher lesson planning, classroom modeling, lab sites, intervisitations to support technology as a tool for differentiation The Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, and Select group of Teachers, educational consultant Leadership and teachers Average ELA Proficiency September 2018 to June 2019 Average Math Proficiency Performance Index on Math State Exam Performance Assessment Results Observations Meeting Minutes Periodic Assessment Results Performance Assessment Results 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our first parent teacher conference will be set up as a curriculum night, which will focus on developing parents' understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards. Along with targeted workshops, parents will have access to an online gradebook, standards progress reports, and digital access to curriculum resources. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. 1. Per session for PD,(also per diem) after school and Saturday 2. Scheduled time during the school day for common planning 3. Scheduled time during the school day for teacher teams to master and apply the LASW protocol 4. Assistant Principals 5. Lead Teachers /Peer Collaborative 6. STEM Professional Development and Coaching providers (A+Mobile Solutions, TEQ, Teaching Matters, Digital Age Learning ) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, all teachers will implement Common Core aligned literacy instructional tasks across all content areas with multiple entry points for diverse learners which will result in an interim increase in ELA proficiency by 5% and an interim increase in Math proficiency by 5%, as measured by i-Ready diagnostic assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  iReady to monitor student progress Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Framework for Great Schools Progress Supportive Environment Our school has established overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success through several programs that promote students academic success, family engagement and student social and emotional health and wellness'. Last year our program expanded to include a school store, class section sheets, weekly class rewards, monthly student awards ceremony, special incentive trips, and a school spirit week. This year we continue to build upon this expansion by consistently improving the quality of each of the listed components. We’ve put together a student government that oversees the sections sheets, cafeteria board games, community service, mouse squad, reading club, senior activities, and grade level celebrations. Through fruitful partnerships with NY, Strings, and The Greys Cadets, our school has been able to attain the most progress in the element of supportive environment. These additional offerings have positively impacted the “school” experience for all students. As a result, it has improved our teacher and student attendance along with the building’s overall tone. We will continue to empower student government to engage in school- wide decision-making.  In partnership with Center for Supportive Schools, we’ve included Dance, Music, Theater, and Visual Arts in the program offering for all students. These electives are taught in specially designed spaces that create an 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  authentic learning environment and which allow for a serious exploration of the career possibilities within each of the Performing Arts. The programmatic design along with the designated spaces allows for parallel scheduling and student choice. Our newly built computer lab will be used as a designated space for engineering courses which includes robotics, coding, and programming. These additional electives have also contributed to a significant reduction in rate of incidents and suspensions.  Our school is currently represented by 19 different languages. Historically, MS80 receives many students that are newcomers to the country throughout the year. Many of them encounter culture shock, anxiety, and a variety of challenges. As a result, we will create 2-3 new comers’ classes to support students with acclimating, assimilating, and transitioning. Reflections on HEDI Ratings: ● The school articulates a vision for supportive environment through varied support structures. The school has implemented a School wide PBIS program for the last three years which promotes the Core Values of (Self-Regulation, Trustworthy, Academic Excellence, Respect, and Responsibility-STARR) . ● The review of discipline data shows a decrease in both the number of referrals and suspensions when compared to last year. The staff implements several programs that align to the school’s vision for supportive environments, which provide greater opportunities for students to learn in a positive school environment. ● All members of the school are aware of the importance of their contributions in supporting the school vision for social emotional developmental support. ● The school leaders and staff review data from Skedula and OORS to respond to student social and emotional developmental needs. ● The school will continue to closely monitor the number and nature of disciplinary referrals each month. In addition, school’s staff will continue to review individual behavioral records in order to identify additional guidance and support needs. Once students are identified, staff makes a referral to either the Social Worker or to the School Counselor. As a result, students have increased opportunities to learn in a safe environment, which strengthens students’ chances of becoming academically successful. Areas of strength o Our leadership team reviews our schools’ incidents’ data on a monthly basis to inform school wide behavioral management strategies. o Students receive positive rewards for displaying the school’s core values on a daily basis through an internal currency named “S.T.A.R.R. bucks. S.T.A.R.R. represents our school’s Core Values which are consistently promoted through our PBIS program (Self-Discipline, Trustworthy, Academic Excellence, Respect, Responsibility). All students are given an opportunity to exchange their earned STARR bucks at the school store once a week. o The guidance team has a manageable caseload that allows for more targeted student support. o The community team has on-going communication with parents, logs these communications in Skedula, and follow up on a wide array of issues and concerns. The team follows up on daily data points such as lateness to school, uniform challenges, absences, and family engagement at school activities. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  The school leader envisions a commitment by all stakeholders including CBOs to the shared vision, focusing resources, and efforts on improving support systems and student performance. The school staff will strengthen the work and collaboration of CBOs in order to support the social and emotional growth and health of our students. CBOs will be consistent and visible partners in the assessment of needs, developments of plans, and monitoring of success. A student government body will offer a vehicle for students to be active participants, collaborators, and supporters of the socio-emotional development systems. Monthly meetings will provide the student government representatives with a forum for communication and collaboration. Our school has built upon last year’s goal to further develop positive rewards programs such as PBIS to support our students socio-emotional development. Last year our PBIS program expanded to include a school store, class section sheets, weekly class rewards, monthly student awards ceremony, special incentive trips, and a school spirit week. This year we continue to build upon this expansion by consistently improving the quality of each component. We have put together student lead teams that oversees the sections sheets, cafeteria board games, community service group, mouse squad, reading club, and grade level celebrations. Our school will also expand the current sports offerings and create intra-mural tournaments in basketball, baseball, football, soccer, etc. Through fruitful partnerships with CBOs such as The Greys Cadets and others, our school will foster a cohesive community that addresses social emotional development with our students. These initiatives will continue to have an impact our school by reducing our rate of incidents, reducing our suspensions, improving our teacher and student attendance, and improving our overall building’s tone. Teachers, community partners, and school leaders will use school-wide data from sources such as Skedula anecdotes and OORS to assess the social/emotional well-being of our students, develop and monitor programs that target top priority areas, and help the school identify tools that could be useful in determining the success of the programs created. Attendance and chronic absenteeism will be monitored on a weekly basis with dedicated staff meetings that specifically focus on student attendance. Parents will be integral partners and collaborators in support programs that aim to reduce and eliminate chronic absenteeism. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. MS 80 prides itself in building a collaborative community where all stakeholders clearly communicate and develop trust. Teachers MS 80 has a key focus on “Team.” Teachers are structured into grade-level content teams, grade-level interdisciplinary teams, and school-wide department teams. Administration and staff work together to build and support these relationships, and deepen the understanding of school-wide expectations for teaching and learning. Additionally, Administration will meet on a weekly basis with tier 3 teachers and DSR to ensure clear understanding of instructional foci, staff needs, and student concerns. Students The school is moving into year two of the “Peer Group Connections” program. This program partners grade 8 student mentors with grade 6 students, to discuss relevant issues, and share information on the MS 80 community. This allows students to build trust across grades. Families/ Community Partners As a community school we provide many programs to meet the needs of parents, families, and community. An example of this is our Saturday ESL class to build language base, as well as strengthen the home-school-community partnership. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33 Opportunities such as these allow the school to learn about the diverse needs of our community, and to support families in achieving high expectations for students. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Center for Supportive Schools To have a shared vision that focuses on resources, improving support systems , parent outreach and student performance. To engage students in playing of instruments, orchestra, and band Renaissance Music Program How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? Teachers, community partners, school leaders and parents from our SLT will use our school-wide data from sources such as NV Student Sorter and Heat Map, Skedula, anecdotals and OORS to assess the social/emotional well-being of our students, develop and monitor programs that target top priority areas, and help the school identify tools that could be useful in determining the success of the programs created. Attendance and chronic absenteeism will also be monitored on a weekly basis with dedicated staff meetings that specifically focus on student attendance and lateness. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? At MS 80 diversity is explored and celebrated by all staff and students across the content. Many of the units of study utilize essential questions that deal with topics of “growing up” “challenges and accomplishments” “immigration”, and “freedom.” What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? With the support of the Community School Director, the school will administer surveys to students, staff and parents to assess climate and field suggestions on improving cultural responsiveness. The student government, moderated by the CSD and staff volunteer, will also serve as a sounding board for student concerns on ensuring a positive school experience. Additionally, the CSD will host monthly community meetings to further support positive community –school partnerships. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. During the 2018-19 academic year, all English, Social Studies, and Science teachers will embed supportive learning structures, both academic and behavioral, to improve students' abilities to engage in independent reading and conferencing in small groups to address the needs of all students. This will result in a reduction of Level 1 students in both ELA and Math by 10%, as measured by the 2019 ELA and Math State Exams. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34 Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve 3-8 ELA Percent Level 2 & Above by 40%. 3-8 Math Percent Level 2 & Above by 40%. Student Achievement - PI Index of 70 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will provide targeted instruction in literacy during the regular school day, with an additional focus on the lowest third of students in each class. Teachers will be provided with on-going Professional Development on using the PBIS matrix and data gathered to reinforce academic personal behaviors that support student learning. Students will receive targeted instruction and support that leads to improved academic performance and behaviors of effective learners. Teachers will embed specific strategies that will develop and promote academic behavior of effective learners(Max Scholar) Parent workshops will be held that support parents in employing strategies at home that can be used to promote and develop personal Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All students Sept. 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, ELA, Science, SS teachers Supportive Environment Rigorous Instruction All teachers Supportive Environment Assistant Principal, PBIS Coordinator Sept 2018 - June 2019 All teachers and students Supportive Environment Sept 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, Community Liaisons, and Guidance counselors How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in student engagement (3c); reduction in student referrals; increase in student reading data (Lexile levels, reading time, number of books read, etc.) Increase in student engagement (3c). Decrease in detention, suspensions, incidents and/or referrals. More involvement in Peer Mediation. Increase in student engagement (3c) and Increase in students' academic performance. All teachers Supportive and parents Environment Sept 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Community School Director Increase of parents attending workshops/parent meetings. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  and academic behaviors (CHCF,) The school will continue to provide professional development workshops at least once a month in the analysis and use of data, which will be accessible to all staff digitally, to support a positive socio-emotional development. These data review cycles will inform targeted plans for the neediest students, as well as proactively addressing needs of all students. services providing combination of education, capacity-building and advocacy to strengthen the support system and continuum of learning for children and youth development including supporting teachers’ SEL efforts, instructional strategies.(LCI,) Employment/career readiness skills, Career aspirations, planning, and company visits, Rhythm & Flow Yoga: Wellness, mental clarity, and physical fitness, Educational Outings and Activities, College visits All teachers Supportive and all supportive staff Environment Sept 2018 - June 2019 APs, Counselors, CBO’s School leadership,teachers, Supportive Environment supportive staff, school community and families Sept 2018 - June 2019 Leadership, teachers and supportive staff School leadership, Supportive teachers, Environment supportive staff, school community and families Sept 2018 - June 2019 Leadership, teachers, supportive staff, CBO Decrease in detention, suspensions, incidents and/or referrals. More involvement in Peer Mediation. Increase in student engagement (3c). Increase in students' academic performance. Decrease in detention, suspensions, incidents and/or referrals. More involvement in Peer Mediation. Increase in student engagement (3c). Increase in students' academic performance. Decrease in detention, suspensions, incidents and/or referrals. More involvement in Peer Mediation. Increase in student engagement (3c). Increase in students' academic performance. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Curriculum Night Parent Workshops Parent Meetings Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Parent coordinator Guidance counselor/Social Worker Community Team Liaisons PBIS Coordinator PBIS materials Per-session/Per diem Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, all level 1 students will improve by a minimum of 5% in the ELA and Math as evidenced by the i-Ready assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be assessed by the i-Ready assessments. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed x 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Data: Areas of Strength Increase in student proficiency (Levels 3/4) in ELA ELA Proficiency 2017 20% ELA Proficiency 2018 32% Increase in student proficiency (Levels 3/4) in Mathematics Mathematics Proficiency 2017 Mathematics Proficiency 2018 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  12% 20% To promote teacher collaboration we have created systemic structures within the school’s programming schedule.  Content area teams meet four times per week.  Grade level teams meet once per week.  Teachers engage in collaborative learning during weekly Monday Professional Learning sessions for 1 hour Teachers are expected to complete team meeting minutes to record goals for student outcomes and identify next steps. During the collaborative team meetings:  Teachers gather and analyze periodic assessment data to create intervention plans and adjust curriculum.  Administrators and Peer Collaborative Teachers facilitate meetings focused on looking at student work. Areas of Need Establish a consistent set of practices using data to address the diverse needs of our students. 1. Collaboratively analyze student data. 2. Design CCLS aligned performance tasks. 3. Consistently implement research-based instructional practices. Most recent Quality Review Report 2016-2017: Quality Indicator: 1.2 Pedagogy Rating: Proficient   Findings: Across classrooms, teaching practices are becoming aligned to the curricula and beginning to reflect a set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the Danielson Framework of Teaching and the instructional shifts. Discussion and work products reflect uneven levels of student thinking. Impact: Across classrooms, high levels of student thinking and participation are yet to be reflected across most classrooms. Quality Indicator: 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership Development Rating: Proficient   Findings The majority of teachers are engaged in structured professional collaborations on teams that may be loosely connected to school goals and the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards. Teacher teams analyze assessment data and student work for students they share or on whom they are focused. Impact: The use of an inquiry approach is developing across the teams. The work does not yet typically result in improved teacher practice or progress toward goals for groups of students. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  1. Collaboratively analyze student data. o Ongoing analysis of assessment data, performance tasks, and digital tools data to develop consistent instructional practices. o Consistently implement looking at Student Work Protocol 2. Design CCLS aligned performance tasks that address areas of need based on the NYS ELA and Mathematics assessment results. 3. Consistently implement research-based instructional practices. Identify instructional practices that meet student needs based on data and student work analysis Integration of technology to support student engagement o o o Peer Collaborative Teachers will coach teachers to establish a consistent set of practices aligned to the Danielson Framework How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? The School Instructional Cabinet will meet on a weekly basis to: 1. Analyze digital tools data 2. Set goals for teacher team meetings 3. Identify teachers that need coaching 4. Determine specific supports based on classroom observations 5. Establish goals for looking at student work protocol How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? During team meetings and Monday Professional Learning sessions, to improve teacher practices and student learning teachers will: 1. Collaboratively analyze student data and student work to: Identify the specific CCLS that will be targeted in units and lessons o o Refine the curriculum based on the CCLS and findings from looking at student work o Assign differentiated digital tasks aligned to specific standards 2. Design CCLS aligned performance tasks that address areas of need based on the NYS ELA and Mathematics assessment results. o Develop units and lessons that target CCLS based on the data. o Develop tasks that require students to build knowledge through text and construct evidence based arguments. o Develop tasks that require students to Identify specific students that need academic interventions/supports and assign specific digital assignments o Use rubrics to develop clear criteria and engage students in self/peer assessment 3. Consistently implement research-based instructional practices. o Determine specific instructional practices aligned to the Measures of Teacher Practice that will be evident across content area classes and interdisciplinary teams Incorporate Team Teaching Models that support student learning needs - ENL Integrated, ICT Integrate technology to engage students in learning o o o Peer Collaborative Teachers will coach teachers using a specific process: Planning, Modeling/Coaching, Actionable Feedback Incorporate intervisitations to support a collaborative teaching approach o 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  o Reflect on instructional practices and their impact on student engagement/student performance. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed Intent Digital Tools Data 1. Differentiate assignments based on individual students' performance and misconceptions 1. Performance on CCLS - ELA and Mathematics 2. Monitor lexile growth and conference with students during Everyone Is Reading (EIR) 3. Conference with students to set goals and ensure that students are self-monitoring 2. Lexile performance 4. Ensure that teachers are consistently assigning lessons via digital tools and monitoring student usage/performance 3. Usage Student Work Performance Tasks 1. Determine the CCLS that need to be integrated in the learning units and daily lesson plans Formative Assessments 2. Plan differentiated assignments based on individual students' performance and misconceptions Periodic Assessments 3. Determine the writing skills to incorporate in the learning units and across content areas 4. Develop student friendly rubrics and checklists 5. Provide students with immediate feedback 1. Determine topics for professional learning sessions 2. Identify model teachers for intervisitation 3. Identify teachers that need support from PCT Measures of Teacher Practice Ratings Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? i-Ready Diagnostic Common Assessments Ready Assessment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42  The i-Ready assessments are able to screen, sort, and group students according to common needs. It also provides the lesson and resources. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, content area teams will collaboratively analyze student ELA data to make appropriate curricular adjustments that address needed reading and writing skills which will result in a 10% reduction in students scoring at Level one on the NYS ELA. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? 1. Leading Indicator - Framework: Collaborative Teachers 2. Student Achievement Benchmarks - Average ELA and Math Proficiency Rating 3. SED Receivership Benchmarks - 3-8 ELA and Math Percent Level 2 & Above 4. Student Achievement - PI Index 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? All core content teachers 1. Collaborative Teachers 2. Proficiency rating Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teachers, Teachers Teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) 1. Weekly reports of digital tools usage and student performance 2. Team meeting minutes Unit plans, lesson plans, and student work will reflect building knowledge from text and writing from sources Beginning Sept. 2018-June 2019 Weekly common planning meetings Monthly during Monday Professional Learning Beginning Sept. 2018-June 2019 Weekly during common planning meetings Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will engage in data analysis in weekly cycles using the following: 1. Digital Tools 2. Looking at Student Work Protocol Based on student assessment data, teachers will decide on specific research-based Teachers During team meetings, teachers will collaboratively develop Performance Tasks Aligned to CCLS 1. Collaborative Teachers 2. Proficiency rating Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative Teachers, 1. Leading Indicator - Collaborative Teachers Bi-weekly in monthly cycles starting November Peer Collaborative Teachers, Assistant Principals 1. Coaching Logs 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  Instructional Practices that support differentiated instruction based on student assessment data through: Teachers 2018- March 2019 2. Team Meeting Minutes 3. Measures of Teacher Practice ratings by Component - 3b, 3c, 3d 1. Peer Coaching 2. Intervisitations 3. Conference attendance and presenting Teachers will implement literacy-based instructional tasks based on student progress data with multiple entry points across all content areas. They will report on implementation successes and challenges during teacher team meetings. All Teachers Lexile progres, iReady progress, and grades September 2018- June 2019 School Leaders, Teachers, and Teacher Leaders Lexile progress, iReady progress, and grades 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Curriculum Night Parent Teacher Conference On-going Parent Meetings Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. 1. Per session 2. Instructional coaches 3. STEM Professional Development and Coaching providers 4. Science Coach Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 1. Agenda from team meetings will reflect analysis of assessment data and student work resulting in adjustments to unit and lesson plans to address needs of all students 2. Performance data from digital tools and periodic assessments will demonstrate an increase in students performance in specific standards. 3. The summary of Measures of Teacher Practice ratings will improve by 10% across the school in components 3b, 3c, and 3d. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. Periodic Assessment Data and Digital Tools Reports (usage and performance) 2. Team Meeting Minutes 3. Measures of Teacher Practice Ratings 4. Coaching Logs Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strength Students are also using digital tools such as Khan Academy to support and reinforce mathematics instruction. In addition, to further strengthen the school’s science program, through the school’s after school program, students engage in science, technology, engineering and mathematics classes including advanced courses in Earth Science, Integrated Algebra, US History, and English. Findings: The majority of teachers are engaged in structured professional collaborations on teams that may be loosely connected to school goals and the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards. Teacher teams analyze assessment data and student work for students they share or on whom they are focused. Impact: The use of an inquiry approach is developing across the teams. The work does not yet typically result in improved teacher practice or progress toward goals for groups of students. Need: Teacher team inquiry and analysis of assessment data and student work to result in improved teacher practice or progress toward goals for groups of students. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? ● The school leader will work through a distributive leadership structure that will ensure a clear grasp of mission and vision is attained by all staff members. Through conferences, retreats and the development of a technology think tank(inclusive of the broader school community), a distributive leadership structure will be developed to create and implement a multi-year technology plan. ● The shared vision and mission will drive all decision making across the school and will determine the data trail that is monitored throughout the academic year. The SLT will identify SCEP aligned data points ( attendance, benchmark assessments, behavioral data,,etc. ) to monitor on a monthly basis during each SLT meeting. ● The school’s leaders will engage all staff (including support staff) in goal-setting conversations during the month of September, in direct alignment to the school’s vision, mission, SCEP, and priorities. The objective is to ensure every staff member has a clear understanding of our school wide goals for improvement and how each member contributes to the collective measures of success. During these conversations, all staff members (Including support staff) identifying SMART goals around Supportive Environment and Collaboration while teachers will also identify individualized Danielson, student performance, and classroom environment goals aligned to SCEP priorities. ● The principal and assistant principals will engage all teachers in at least 4 cycles of goal setting/reviewing, student data reviews, co-development of individualized professional development plans, and a minimum of 4 informal/formal classroom observations. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? Using of evidence-based systems and structures to coaching key staff, which will result in the improvement of individual and school-wide practices. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Individuals will have constant support via principal, assistant principals, coaches, mentors, master teachers, and peer collaborators. New teachers will be assigned mentors and given priority focus for working with instructional coaches as much as is feasible. Teachers that demonstrate leadership qualities along with administrators will be sponsored to attend local, national, and international conferences that support the school’s goals and needs. These teachers and administrators will be required to turn-key to the staff and to take on leadership roles in the school. In addition to peer-collaborative teachers in each core subject, the school will hire at least 4 model teachers to support other teachers. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The School leader will designate community school liaisons for each grade to support cohesion, communication, and effective collaboration with the CBO partnerships. The Community School Director will be part of the leadership cabinet and will be involved in all key decision making processes. This Community Team will be responsible for keeping track of all supports, referrals, and services that each student is and will be receiving. This team will also attend teacher team meetings to collect, share, and analyze social emotional data. They will proactively engage students and their families in identifying areas of need and available resources. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Students responses that reflect their thinking made visible Periodic Assessment data collected via iReady tool. Teachers will be trained in pedagogical practices that allow for students to make their thinking visible. iReady Coach will support teacher teams in using the data collected in iReady to inform instructional planning. Teacher leaders will bring in teams of teachers to observe best practices School Leaders will engage with Teachers in review of their periodic assessment data Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. During the 2018-19 school year, the leadership team will work closely with teacher leaders representing all core subjects in order to build teacher capacity across the school and establish a culture for learning that supports the school’s mission and vision based on Advance data. This will result in establishing at least two model classrooms per core subject in order to share best practices across all classrooms. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Collaborative Teachers Supportive Environment PI Index - Math 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Collaborative Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Coaches and Assistant Principals How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Observations Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Professional Learning Plan focused on supporting teachers in aligning instructional tasks and supporting targeted students’ needs. 60 minutes a week will be allotted for this targeted work in 6-8 week cycles, including planned and focused visits to model classrooms. A schedule for intervisitations will be created and adjusted during the year to ensure that teachers have opportunities to observe specific practices, as needed. Designated teachers (including new teachers, developing teachers, etc.) Collaborative teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Coaches, Model Teachers and Assistant Principals Observations All teachers Collaborative Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Coaches and Assistant Principals Intra-visitations All teachers, teacher leaders and school leaders Collaborative Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 Instructional Coaches and Assistant Principals Model Classrooms All teachers will have an individualized support plan in order to support their targeted needs. Administrators and Peer Collaborative Teachers will engage all teachers in scaling each school wide goal to individual teacher goals. Teachers will be provided with a detailed analysis of 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  ELA/Math assessment results. The school will monitor teachers' improving practices as a result of visiting model classrooms through Advance observation data and informal classroom visits. Designated teachers 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Collaborative Teachers September All teachers 2018 to June 2019 Advance observation data How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Curriculum Night Parent Workshops Parent Meetings Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. ∙ Per session for after school and per diem for PD coverage ∙ Scheduled time during the school day for common planning ∙ Scheduled time during the school day for teacher teams to master and apply the LASW protocol ∙ Assistant Principals ∙ Lead Teachers/Instructional Coaches Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  By February 2019, a minimum of 10 new and other developing teachers will be scheduled to observe specific practices in model classrooms, resulting in improvement in identified Danielson components as demonstrated in Advance observation data. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Inter-visitation schedules and log One model classroom in each core subject Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Isobel Rooney has different methods of communicating with families: email, phone calls, flyers, mail, app alerts, and monthly newsletters. We have identified a designated time on Mondays for teachers to contact parents. We also have grade level Community Staff that contact individual parents to share their child’s socio-emotional progress in school. We have also designated specific attendance staff members per grade level to contact parents about student attendance. We remain to keep an “Open Door” policy for parents. Families are welcomed to visit the school any time to address student and household needs as deemed necessary. We have provided numerous workshops which were strategically selected to address the needs of the families. Workshops included but were not limited to the following: English Language development, cultural gatherings, financial literacy workshop, and Skedula. We will continue to focus on implanting effective methods of communication and the incorporation of feedback following all parent/community engagement events. Our community team composed of key faculty continue to gather on a weekly basis to collectively strategies on innovative ways to engage our parents and create an environment of reciprocal communication. As of last year, our parent response rate has more than doubled and our percentage of strong community ties continue to increase As far as areas of improvement go, we need to continue to foster a growing connection between our teachers and our English language learner students as well as rest of the family so that the students are able to be more comfortable with the material and more likely to participate in class to achieve a higher level of thinking. We can foster this by getting the English language learners and the rest of the students' parents more informed and connected on how to help the students at home through our workshops involving technology and Skedula hours. This will help the parents to keep 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  track and better prepare the students at home to understand the material so they can participate and contribute in the classroom with the teachers. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? To complement our instructional vision, the school envisions becoming a community hub which will offer a family wellness center/mental health clinic auditorium/theatre, cafeteria, gymnasium and upgraded facility to accommodate technology throughout including classroom spaces to serve as multi-purpose rooms for community and Adult Education programming on weekends and evenings and for STEM activities to support student academic achievement both during the school day as well as during ELT. Our school has been engaged in STEM Professional Development and Coaching. Our ELT model blends school staff with community partners, and provides a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, and physical activity. Moreover, to ensure that program activities are useful and significant to students, staff members and school administrators capital upgrades will support the quality of STEM instructional practices. The school will have multilingual welcome posters around the entrance. In addition, training will be provided to school safety agents provided by Parent Coordinator/Language Access Coordinator (aside from forms provided by NYC DOE) on welcoming families. In addition, the following measures are to take place: In addition to better understand our incoming families; we will conduct ethnographies on our families through a questionnaire, conversation and or phone surveys. The ethnography addresses the following areas: ● reasons for relocating ● time in community ● home language ● health beliefs ● crisis events ● holidays and special events ● contact with cultural and religious institutions ● values about education and work ● values about family structure ● what type of things the family expects from the school ● how many children? ● who is at home? ● living situation 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  The results of the ethnography will be uploaded to Skedula on an ongoing basis so as to be shared with teachers, so that they are able to better understand the students who they are teaching. To further foster the sense of community at Isobel Rooney, we will host Parent to Parent Meetings, where staff and their children will join our families in a social gathering to share experiences. Our lead CBO, CSS will bring ESL and TASC classes to our community. CSS will also provide classes to obtain child care and home health aide licenses. Aside from these classes, Isobel Rooney will continue to provide Rosetta Stone access to our families. Other adult/parent opportunities will include Technology Hour and Skedula Hour: set times during the week where parents can come to the school and get basic computer help and help navigating through Skedula. Technology Hour will offer our families the opportunity to become families with the tools that their children are using, like Google Classroom, Google Drive, email, Achieve 3000, EScience, IXL, to name a few. During the Skedula hour parents will learn how to log in and will receive assistance in navigating the database until they reach a level of proficiency in their areas of need. Both Technology Hour and Skedula Hour will take place in the Parent Center Computer Lab. In addition, to familiarize our families with Common Core State Standards, Isobel Rooney will host monthly workshops on Understanding Common Core State Standards. Isobel Rooney will engage parents through adult educational offerings that range from Learning English as a Second Language (Rosetta Stone), Resume Building Workshops, Internet Job search, Emergency Preparedness Workshop, and CPR. Our families will continue to have access to their child’s progress through Skedula and through the Individualized Student Support Plan. The first Individualized Student Support Plan was distributed during Curriculum Night where teachers took the time to explain to our families how the support plan works, including baseline lexile levels, and how to track their child’s progress using the Electronic Tools. In addition, during curriculum night, teachers will explain our standards based grading system to parents. Parents will then be able to come in during technology hour to follow up on their child’s progress. Teachers will update the support plan learning goals on a bi-monthly basis. In addition, Holiday Packets will be based on areas in need of improvement. To strengthen community ties, JHS Mosholu Parkway Middle School 80 will continue to partner with Learning Leaders to provide workshops around education and Volunteer Trainings at the school. In addition, Isobel Rooney will partner with Montefiore Hospital to provide free trainings in the school. Isobel Rooney will continue to advertise programming that is relevant to the community in public forums such as local newspapers and local news. Our Parents’ Association will work with the 204th Merchants Association to create a discount program for parent volunteers. In addition, we will strengthen our relationship with our feeder schools and extend the services that are provided at Isobel Rooney to those families. Middle School 80 has also conducted a fall open house and invited our feeder schools to attend. Middle School 80 will invite our neighbor, Public School 280 to join us in beautifying the campus with a community garden. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? When new families are introduced to our school, we will conduct our ethnographic survey to better understand who they are and how we can begin to help them. The families have a dedicated space within the parent resource room where they can go to for any needs and information at any time. Also the scheduled technology and Skedula hour will help serve to bring them closer to the rest of the community with help from all the faculty and the rest of the parents. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? The school identifies these families through the parent association where parents are given a voice to express their concerns and opinions on matters within the school that can be improved or changed to help propel all of us forward. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  We continue to develop more families by keeping with our open door policy where any family can come in any time and we can speak about their needs and wants so we can help them along and integrate them into our community to help others as well How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Every Monday we have an open hour for parents to come in and talk to the teachers and address any problems, concerns or suggestions to better help the teachers cater to each child individually. Our dedicated attendance team also calls and follows up with any students that are absent and sets up meetings with the parents to come in and discuss what is happening at home as well as bring in teacher input for how they are doing in class. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parent Association Family partnerships with CBO: Center for Supportive Schools, Renaissance Music, Grey's Cadets Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes, they are conveniently located within the family room for easy access to parents and whoever else is interested What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? We use Skedula for the school faculty that the parents also have access to, where they can track all the students' progress for the year on that application as to stay aware of what is going on as well as the strengths and weakness areas of their child Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. During the 2018-19 academic year, we will expand and leverage our community based partnerships in order to address the holistic needs of our families and support student success This will result in an increase of at least 5% in positive responses for “Strong Family-Community Ties”, as measured by the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? Parent Attendance Supportive Environment ELA Proficiency 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56 Math Proficiency 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parent Attendance All families Conduct bi-monthly workshops for parents that focus on academic topics: Parent Coordinator Beginning Sept. 2018-June 2019 Bi-monthly How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Parent Attendance -Standards Based Report Cards -Skedula Trainings -Common Core State Standards Host parent workshops on socioemotional development and health--Montefiore Hospital, parenting workshops, anti-bullying workshops. Parents will be invited to our school by grade level to complete the NYC school surveys. We will keep an attendance sheet to keep a record of parents that have completed the surveys. Establish partnerships with local cultural institutions in order to provide additional academic and recreational Sll families Parent Attendance Bi monthly starting Nov 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator Parent Attendance All families Parent Survey Completion Rate Jan-April 2019 Parent coordinator Parent Survey Completion Rate School and local community LES survey and OCS forum focus groups Beginning Sept. 2018-June 2019 parent satisfaction survey Leadership, an cultural partnerships including Wave Hill, Museum of Mathematics, Bronx Botanical Gardens, Bronx Zoo, and Bronx County Historical Society 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  opportunities for students and families Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Parent Coordinator, Community Assistant, Community Associate , Guidance Counselor, and Social Worker Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 10% of families should have participated and provided positive feedback in at least 1 academic workshop or Parent event aside from parent teacher conferences . Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance rosters and feedback for parent events and workshops Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Goal 1- The average proficiency rating for ELA will increase by 10% Goal 2- The average proficiency rating for Math will increase by 10% Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. N/A Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60   How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The school will allocate 60 minutes per day, five days a week at the end of the school day, to increase instructional time for all students. This time will focus on reading and writing across the curriculum in the areas of ELA, Science, and Social Studies. In Math, this time will be used to build Math fluency. The ELA curriculum is non-fiction text with a focus on comprehension strategies, this will be done through the use of iReadyand the lessons provided through the application. Students will also use the digital tools with lessons as assigned by teachers and based on the results of the periodic assessments and their performance on specific key standards. The impact of our ELT will be measured through student performance in key standards and Lexile Growth (tracked through Achieve 3000). Diagnostic, formative, and summative assessments will be administered throughout the year in all core courses. Students will be assessed on grade level CCSS for each content area. The data will be analyzed by teachers at the classroom level and by administrators and teacher teams at the grade level. Support plans will be developed based on the data to assist teachers with designing data driven coherent instruction. This process will be continuous throughout the year. The results will also be shared with students and parents to inform on academic progress. There will be 4 cycles of assessments during the year. By the end of year 2, students will show significant gains in their performance levels in ELA and Math as measured in NY State exams. The school will increase the number of students achieving level 3 performance by 5% and move at least 25% of level 1 students to level 2. ● The focus of the ELT will be on reading and writing through the content areas using iReady ● The integration of common core aligned digital tools Achieve3000 and IXL math, will support the differentiated learning needs of all students. The needs will be identified and monitored by standards-based performance in Baseline/Periodic Assessments. ● Although ELT’s renewal hour will be for all students, ELT will be further extended for a group of about 250 students. During this second part of extended day, students will be offered enrichment activities such as Art, Theater, Dance, Music, Robotics, Sports, Photography, and Videography. ● Community educators and staff will receive PD through both the school and community partner Center for Supportive Schools Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. ●The key personnel that will be responsible for overseeing the ELT program will be the Principal, Assistant Principals, and Community School Director. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  ●We will monitor ELA and Math progress for all students in ELT by reviewing iReady IXL Math, and periodic assessment performance data through 6 cycles during the year. ●All students will be supported by a content area teacher in working to improve reading and writing across content areas for 75 minutes 4 times a week. ●Additional staff from the Community Partner will pushing into classrooms to strategically support small groups of students with targeted needs. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018-June 2019 ●The program will start on 9/8/2018 ●The program will end on June 28, 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. ●Extended school day Monday-Friday additional 60 minutes each day ●Salary as per the collective bargaining agreement ●Instructional resources: (Achieve 3000 Licenses and IXL Licenses) ●iReadyProfessional Development ●iReady Professional Development Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, through a comprehensive Expanded Learning Time program to increase instructional time for all students with a focus on reading and writing across the curriculum in the areas of ELA, Science, and Social Studies, students will demonstrate improvement in performance as measured by: ●Periodic assessments will be used to measure the student's’ progress toward meeting the renewal benchmark goals. ●ELA mid-point benchmark: increase by 5% 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  ●Math mid-point benchmark: increase by 5% ●iReady summary data to evaluate progress in key standards RI/RL Key Ideas and Details. There will be at least a 5% increase in proficiency from the baseline to February 2019 Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady Periodic Assessment data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The community school model has been implemented to leverage the joint efforts of the school’s campus partner community schools to increase student leadership and parent engagement by 20%. This will be achieved through targeted programming utilizing shared CBO providers (ELT, Afterschool); shared health and mental health services; parent and family focused workshops, classes, and events; evidence based programs for student leadership and mentoring; and creating systems for sustainable data tracking targeting improvement of student attendance and parent/family engagement. Our school has seen improvement not only in test scores, but in Regents’ performance as a result of a coordinated community school strategy that focuses on social emotional learning through community partnerships. This encompasses high-quality arts programming, a comprehensive after school program, family support, mental health and wellness, and a focus on experiential learning that are a best practice for achieving higher academic outcomes. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year are as follows: 1. By June, 2019 Parent Engagement at MS 80 will be at 20% or higher as measured by attendance tracking and anecdotal data submitted in the iOs and Center for Supportive Schools tracking. 2. By June, 2019 utilization rates for mental health services will increase by 50% as measured by attendance tracking, individual assessments and anecdotal data submitted in the New Visions data tracking tools. 3. By June 2019, our attendance will increase to 94% for our official student average daily attendance. 4. By June 2019, all 6th graders will have completed our 8th grade led Peer Group Connection Curriculum. This will show an increase in attendance and a gradual reduction in disciplinary incidents. 5. By June 2019, 46 students in our Achievement Mentoring program will have had 1:1 mentoring every week while showing an increase in academic performance and attendance and a drop in disciplinary incidents. Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students?  An increase in attendance will add in hundreds of instructional hours leading to greater academic achievement for our students.  Higher parent participation and involvement has been the hallmark of great schools and improvement and our community school strategy is heavily focused on improving it.  With the addition of a second clinician and 33% more services from our Family Resource Specialist we plan to engage 50% more students in targeted services. These students take up almost three times as much time with counselors, so engaging more will allow our counseling team to collaborate more with our teachers to achieve higher student outcomes.  Through Peer Group Connection, our 6th graders will have increasing attendance throughout the year and gradual drops in incidents leading to higher academic achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64   Through Achievement Mentoring, students with mentors will show be able to reach their academic goals through better and more regular participation in the school community. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Center for Supportive Schools All students Lead CBO New Yorkers Against Gun Violence All students Pearson (Change of Practice) Teachers Grey's Cadets Generation Code ASPIRA All Students All Students All Students Sub-group of all students Professional Development Sub-group of all students Sub-group of all students Sub-group of all students Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. 1 – The school will leverage the Community School Administrator, the School Leadership Team and the needs and asset assessment, as well as, Expanded Learning Time and Mental Health Programming, by consistently and cohesively engaging teachers and administrators to assure that established and identified Individual Action Plans relevant to the student are appropriately implemented, according to the community school strategy and established protocols. School staff members will closely work with the SLT and the CST to identify and group eligible students in tiered cohorts, according to their expected level of service, using the NYC DOE Selection Criteria within the community schools framework. Moreover, data derived from the Efforts to Outcome program, and relevant digital school-based programs, will help to inform how to best leverage resources to achieve individual academic success. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  Teachers and administrators will be encouraged to work on a consistent basis with the Community School Administrator when issues arise. They will be expected to assure that all resources available through the community schools initiative are accessed to assure student academic achievement and success. In addition, professional training will be conducted to quickly identify and integrate any required emotional or support services for students and their families. 2 – Once the personalized needs of students are identified vis-à-vis the needs and assets assessment, constant monitoring of student progress will be monitored and appropriate programming adjustments will be made based on those observations, and in consultation with the Community School Administrator and appropriate parties in the Community School Team. Based on prior meetings, planned programming appears to meet needs, which will reflect the needs assessment conducted by the Community Schools Administrator. It has been agreed that if a particular service is required to meet a unique need, the appropriate community based organization will be identified and sub-contracted, or an appropriate referral will take place. 3 – In partnership with the School Leadership Team and the Community Schools Team, a schedule will be designed and implemented to assure the active input and engagement of parents and families in the construct, design and implementation of the community school. Monthly forums involving the SLT and the CST, parents and community stakeholders will take place as part of a broader engagement strategy, which includes home visits, telephone calls, e-mails and family-friendly, school-based events. Measures will be taken to assure a safe, welcoming school environment where parent engagement and input will be consistently encouraged within the community schools framework and overarching strategy. Teachers and administrators are encouraged to be highly pro-active and to work closely with the Community Leadership Team to identify and anticipate any family issues which may impede the success and academic achievement of the student. 4 – Weekly meeting will be scheduled with the CSD, relevant assistant principals, teachers and key members of partner CBOs to examine trends in data services from the New Visions Data Tracker. IAPs will be closely examined and programming and services adjustments will be made to assure student success. In partnership with the SLT, CST and the CSD, the community school and CSS will track progress toward meeting programmatic goals by conducting a community need and assets analysis report which aides in cultivating a comprehensive impactful program, incorporating school and community resources. CSS will focus on identifying “internal” and “external” barriers relative to student success, as well as, readily available community resources to foster a shared vision. CSS documents agreements with all partners, reflecting a deep commitment with the partner school, as well as, established protocols and procedures. 1. Community School Team - By scheduling regular meetings, keeping decision-makers informed and engaged, and working in conjunction with the School Leadership Team, CSS aligns support with school goals and education standards by providing comprehensive services and activities designed to address specific school and community needs. 2. Parent Engagement – Parent meetings are planned with families on an as-needed basis. Informal counseling sessions will provide an outlet for parents to discuss any issues which may be preventing the students’ and/or family progress. Staff will assist parents in designing goals and problem solving strategies to overcome obstacles they may be facing. Referrals to appropriate agencies will be made, as necessary. 3. Participation in extended learning and enrichment activities - CSS activities align regular school day education standards with CS services and match the targeted needs of individual students with rigorous academic enrichment and social/emotional support. To ensure that program services and activities are useful and significant to students, program staff and the SLT methodically collaborate to ensure support in areas where students need the most help and then formulate individual academic plans which are used to track progress toward goals. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  4. Utilization rates for mental health services and improved mental health - Initial home visits will be conducted at the beginning of the school year to introduce the Astor Programming to both students and parents. Through planned visitations, CSS will meet with the family to assess family dynamics and to foster a family partnership with the aim of developing action plans addressing factors prohibiting students from achieving academic success. Based on the assessment, strategies to address identified factors will be compassionately implemented. Periodic student assessment of needs through interviews and various assessment instruments allow counselors to work with students to develop action plans and conduct reflective self-assessments. Counselors will maintain contact and progress notes, as well as, running records using a case management methodology. If necessary, staff provides appropriate referrals to certified and qualified partner mental health agencies. Increasing school resources is driven by a shared success vision. Throughout the process, data is gathered and analyzed to inform deeper understanding of issues to alleviate barriers and facilitate movement toward goals and outcomes. Multiple assessments to inform the process, including student and parent needs, teacher and community resource assessments and the construct of a Community Map, detailing community demographics and socio-economic conditions to inform a strategy for increasing resources from the local community. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students  Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) in partnership with school leadership will implement the Community School program and provide oversight. Key personnel include:  Community School Director (CSD) will drive the day-to-day implementation of the Community School program, as described above.  Mr. Polanco, Principal, will provide general oversight and feedback for SLT and CST meetings.  Our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Rodriguez will be a leader in outreaching and engaging parents in monthly forums, supporting parents in leveraging our Parent Center, engaging them in workshops and leadership opportunities in the school community, and matching families to community services to meet their needs.  Representatives from all CBO partners will provide monthly reports on progress and challenges to the CST   in accordance with their service agreements where applicable. In partnership with the SLT and the CST, CSS will oversee CS programs. CSS understands that staff members, both paid and volunteer, play a crucial role in successful community school program implementation; therefore the hiring strategy includes recruiting individuals with high quality competency levels. Staff members must possess a minimum of an Associate’s Degree, or be a college Junior or Senior in good standing (BA degree a plus). In addition, staff must major in a related area of study (i.e, health, sports & fitness, education, youth development, social work or education). The recruitment and hiring of staff is functionally aligned with the CSS community school program model and design to ensure that all participants are fully able to achieve strategic goals In addition, CSS places a high value on the following staff attributes: a significant connection to the program’s host school, often resulting in program staff who are also employed by the day-school (e.g., paraprofessionals, administrative staff, certified teachers); knowledge of students’ backgrounds, cultures, and their communities; ability to write and submit lesson plans; be caring, compassionate and energetic. Staff should have leadership qualities, show initiative, work independently and have a desire to make a positive impact on children’s lives. The majority of key staff will be reflective of the community 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  participants’ ethnicity with some actually living in the community. This will help to create community identification, allowing community youth to receive more access and responses from the program. It will also help to increase organizational and individual understanding of how the various dimensions of culture impact served families, and how effectively staff members interact with them. Staff will receive a two week orientation session aligned to support effective performance. Staff will begin their training by receiving a 10-step orientation process covering specific job responsibilities and expectations; overview of the program goals; organization mission, philosophy and history; distribution and review of the personnel handbook; culture and cultural competence principles; understanding of the various cultural groups within communities served by partners schools; and, a cultural competent service delivery process. In partnership with the CSS, the CS Expanded and Extended Learning Time (ELT) model is built on the elements of the most effective, research-tested, after-school programs with a strong foundation consisting of school and community partnerships, principal leadership and a richly varied curriculum offering students multiple avenues to master core skills and knowledge.    CSS effectively utilizes its program model to align enrichment activities with school and district goals, while also meeting the Regent’s Reform priority for college and career readiness through the provision of comprehensive ELT services addressing specific student needs.  ELT activities support and enhance regular school day education standards with program services by matching identified student needs with rigorous academic instruction and enrichment, while addressing the same subjects taught in their schools from a differentiated, more advanced approach. Moreover, to ensure that program activities are useful and significant to students, staff members and school administrators collaborate so that CSS's programming does not supplant or duplicate in-school efforts. Integrated supplemental support is offered in areas where students require the greatest attention for subject mastery.  Program activities are customized in consultation with administrative staff, teachers, counselors and students. Teachers participate in the provision of activities, ensuring that lessons are closely aligned with both New York State and New York City Common Core curricula. Students’ school-day teachers are consulted when designing schedules for each student. Program staff works with teachers to continually monitor student attendance and achievement, ensuring that activities are responsive to respective changing needs.  Teaching artists through organizations including but not limited to Learning Through Expanded Arts Partnership, will be engaged to provide engaging ELA and social studies content through projects-based learning opportunities during ELT.  New Beginnings will provide high quality dance instruction to students. This will be both through classes during regular school periods and during ELT.  Greys Cadets will partner with the school before school, during ELT, and on Saturdays. Greys provides academic support alongside leadership development and social emotional development.  New Yorkers Against Gun Violence will provide restorative practices and leadership development to students during ELT once a week.  Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.  In partnership with the SLT and the CLT, CSS will oversee CS programs. CSS understands that staff members, both paid and volunteer, play a crucial role in successful community school program implementation; therefore the hiring strategy includes recruiting individuals with high quality competency levels. Staff members must possess a minimum of an Associate’s Degree, or be a college Junior or Senior in good standing (BA degree a plus). In addition, staff must major in a related area of study (i.e, health, sports & fitness, education, youth development, social work or education). The recruitment and hiring of staff is functionally aligned with CSS's community school program model and design to ensure that all participants are fully able to achieve strategic goals 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68     In addition, CSS places a high value on the following staff attributes: a significant connection to the program’s host school, often resulting in program staff who are also employed by the day-school (e.g., paraprofessionals, administrative staff, certified teachers); knowledge of students’ backgrounds, cultures, and their communities; ability to write and submit lesson plans; be caring, compassionate and energetic. Staff should have leadership qualities, show initiative, work independently and have a desire to make a positive impact on children’s lives. The majority of key staff will be reflective of the community participants’ ethnicity with some actually living in the community. This will help to create community identification, allowing community youth to receive more access and responses from the program. It will also help to increase organizational and individual understanding of how the various dimensions of culture impact served families, and how effectively staff members interact with them. Staff will receive a two week orientation session aligned to support effective performance. Staff will begin their training by receiving a 10-step orientation process covering specific job responsibilities and expectations; overview of the program goals; organization mission, philosophy and history; distribution and review of the personnel handbook; culture and cultural competence principles; understanding of the various cultural groups within communities served by partners schools; and, a cultural competent service delivery process. In partnership with the Community School, the CSS Expanded and Extended Learning Time (ELT) model is built on the elements of the most effective, research-tested, after-school programs with a strong foundation consisting of school and community partnerships, principal leadership and a richly varied curriculum offering students multiple avenues to master core skills and knowledge.  CSS effectively utilizes its program model to align enrichment activities with school and district goals, while also meeting the Regent’s Reform priority for college and career readiness through the provision of comprehensive ELT services addressing specific student needs.  ELT activities support and enhance regular school day education standards with program services by matching identified student needs with rigorous academic instruction and enrichment, while addressing the same subjects taught in their schools from a differentiated, more advanced approach. Moreover, to ensure that program activities are useful and significant to students, staff members and school administrators collaborate so that CSS's program does not supplant or duplicate in-school efforts. Integrated supplemental support is offered in areas where students require the greatest attention for subject mastery.  Program activities are customized in consultation with administrative staff, teachers, counselors and students. Teachers participate in the provision of activities, ensuring that lessons are closely aligned with both New York State and New York City Common Core curricula. Students’ school-day teachers are consulted when designing schedules for each student. Program staff works with teachers to continually monitor student attendance and achievement, ensuring that activities are responsive to respective changing needs.  Teachers will be requested to provide support for ELT.  CBO partners will be contracted to provide additional in-school support and support for ELT to compensate for and supplement the support that can be provided by teachers.  To implement Peer Group Connection (PGC), selected 8th grade students will participate in a daily peer leadership course. Two to three times per month for 45 minutes, 8th grade peer leaders will “push-in” to all 6th grade classes to conduct activity-based sessions that support 6th grade students’ social and emotional development and help them to positively transition into our school. A full curriculum will be provided by CSS.  Teachers professional time will partly be used to support students in dedicated mentoring through the evidence-based Achievement Mentoring program provided through CSS. A full curriculum will be provided by CSS.  Additional mental health support providers will be contracted to meet our students’ needs.  Additional professional development for teachers will be provided through CSS. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.     In partnership with the SLT and the CLT, CSS will oversee CS programs. CSS understands that staff members, both paid and volunteer, play a crucial role in successful community school program implementation; therefore the hiring strategy includes recruiting individuals with high quality competency levels. Staff members must possess a minimum of an Associate’s Degree, or be a college Junior or Senior in good standing (BA degree a plus). In addition, staff must major in a related area of study (i.e, health, sports & fitness, education, youth development, social work or education). The recruitment and hiring of staff is functionally aligned with CSS's community school program model and design to ensure that all participants are fully able to achieve strategic goals In addition, CSS places a high value on the following staff attributes: a significant connection to the program’s host school, often resulting in program staff who are also employed by the day-school (e.g., paraprofessionals, administrative staff, certified teachers); knowledge of students’ backgrounds, cultures, and their communities; ability to write and submit lesson plans; be caring, compassionate and energetic. Staff should have leadership qualities, show initiative, work independently and have a desire to make a positive impact on children’s lives. The majority of key staff will be reflective of the community participants’ ethnicity with some actually living in the community. This will help to create community identification, allowing community youth to receive more access and responses from the program. It will also help to increase organizational and individual understanding of how the various dimensions of culture impact served families, and how effectively staff members interact with them. Staff will receive a two week orientation session aligned to support effective performance. Staff will begin their training by receiving a 10-step orientation process covering specific job responsibilities and expectations; overview of the program goals; organization mission, philosophy and history; distribution and review of the personnel handbook; culture and cultural competence principles; understanding of the various cultural groups within communities served by partners schools; and, a cultural competent service delivery process. In partnership with the Community School, the CSS Expanded and Extended Learning Time (ELT) model is built on the elements of the most effective, research-tested, after-school programs with a strong foundation consisting of school and community partnerships, principal leadership and a richly varied curriculum offering students multiple avenues to master core skills and knowledge.  CSS effectively utilizes its program model to align enrichment activities with school and district goals, while also meeting the Regent’s Reform priority for college and career readiness through the provision of comprehensive ELT services addressing specific student needs.  ELT activities support and enhance regular school day education standards with program services by matching identified student needs with rigorous academic instruction and enrichment, while addressing the same subjects taught in their schools from a differentiated, more advanced approach. Moreover, to ensure that program activities are useful and significant to students, staff members and school administrators collaborate so that CSS's program does not supplant or duplicate in-school efforts. Integrated supplemental support is offered in areas where students require the greatest attention for subject mastery.  Program activities are customized in consultation with administrative staff, teachers, counselors and students. Teachers participate in the provision of activities, ensuring that lessons are closely aligned with both New York State and New York City Common Core curricula. Students’ school-day teachers are consulted when designing schedules for each student. Program staff works with teachers to continually monitor student attendance and achievement, ensuring that activities are responsive to respective changing needs.  Teachers will be requested to provide support for ELT.  CBO partners will be contracted to provide additional in-school support and support for ELT to compensate for and supplement the support that can be provided by teachers.  To implement Peer Group Connection (PGC), selected 8th grade students will participate in a daily peer leadership course. Two to three times per month for 45 minutes, 8th grade peer leaders will “push-in” to all 6th grade classes to conduct activity-based sessions that support 6th grade students’ social and emotional 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  development and help them to positively transition into our school. A full curriculum will be provided by CSS.  Teachers professional time will partly be used to support students in dedicated mentoring through the evidence-based Achievement Mentoring program provided through CSS. A full curriculum will be provided by CSS.  Additional mental health support providers will be contracted to meet our students’ needs.  Additional professional development for teachers will be provided through CSS. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. August 2018: Partnerships and an effective ELT structure will be in place and communicated with teachers September 2018-June 2019: Our daily Peer Group Connection class will begin with a retreat for the students in late September and they will begin teaching the 6th graders no later than mid-October. October 2018- June 2019: Monthly Community School Team meeting engaging parents, students, faculty, and community partners on grassroots school improvement plans. September 2018-June 2019: Achievement Mentors will be trained by CSS and will begin 1:1 mentoring sessions with a targeted cohort of students. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All students scoring level 1 in ELA State Exam Mathematics All students scoring level 1 in Math State Exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Reading remediation through iReady, Lightsail, Rosetta Stone and iReady.Strategies such as paired reading, listening to passage preview and close reading and read aloud with discussion about text meaning are implemented within the following programs : Rosetta Stone to Support ELLS(new arrivals). General Education and Students with Special Needs LearnIt Systems tutors to support identified students in core classrooms, in small groups after school, on Saturdays and during vacation academies Math remediation is provided with guided practice implementing digital Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, one to one using digital tools. School day and after-school Individualized and small group tutoring Saturdays February Vacation Academy April Vacation Academy Small group School day and Individualized and small group tutoring after-school 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  tools such as IXL, iReady, and Khan Saturdays Individualized and small group tutoring February Vacation Academy April Vacation Academy Small group. School day and after-school and Saturdays Small group and individual using digital tools School day and afterschool Academy. Such tools provide real time feedback and provide LearnIt Systems tutors to support identified students in core classrooms, in small groups after school, on Saturdays and during vacation academies Literacy Interdisciplinary using social studies text. Compare and Tier 1 Students Text navigation, paired reading and repeated reading with question generation and comprehension strategies Tier 2 and/ or 3 Students Repeated reading with comprehension strategies. Literacy Interdisciplinary using social studies text. Compare and Tier 1 Students Text navigation, paired reading and repeated reading with question Science All students scoring level 1 in ELA State Exam Social Studies All students scoring level 1 in ELA State Exam 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73 generation and comprehension strategies Tier 2 and/ or 3 Students Repeated reading with comprehension strategies. Group and Individual Counseling sessions are delivered through role play . Students are exposed to paraphrasing, and summarizing. In addition, a PBIS and advisory have been adopted. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Provided by: Guidance counselor, School Psychologist, and Social worker, Clinical Social Worker (Community Partner) Individual and small group sessions. School day and after-school and Saturdays 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 45 Students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. AIS, After School, Saturday Academy, Community Liaison, Teacher Advisor, and a Success Mentor ( a subgroup of them) Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NOT APPLICABLE 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  NOT APPLICABLE 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NOT APPLICABLE 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies for Recruitment We have created a hiring committee consisting of twelve diverse staff members (5+ years of experience and different content areas). The committee has been formed to support the selection of prospective staff members, whose vision and practice aligns with our school mission and vision. Our recruitment protocol consists of four layers: Layer 1: Pre interview – At least 4 members of the team will be present for the pre interview Layer 2: Demo- lesson 1 – At least 4 members will be present to observe the demo Layer 3: Debrief and Formal Interview by the Panel- 6 members Layer 4: Demo lesson 2/Debrief and interview with Mr. Polanco – Administration official and facilitator Candidates will have an option of two demo lessons or one demo lesson with videotaping (video release disclosure will be available for agreement to videotape). In addition, the hiring committee has formalized a rubric that focuses on Danielson’s Framework for Teaching; components 2A, 2B, 3B, 3C, and 3D to assess candidates in their demo lessons. This will allow consistency when observing the instruction. Retention Strategies ● Our school offers ample professional growth through a myriad of targeted professional development. This provides teachers with opportunities to embark on leadership roles such as participating in mentoring programs, and peer coaching. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  ● There is a culture of reflection and ongoing conversations between administration and staff and staff to staff; therefore, the support system among staff allows for individual and collective growth. Assignments Strategies ∙ Teachers responsibilities are assigned based on certifications, licensing and experience. In addition, professional development aids in determining areas of expertise and preference. Support Activities ● Professional Development - 175 Hours based ( Pearson, LCI, Teachers Consortium, Skedula) ● Mentoring Program ● Technology Support through Apple ● Peer coaching model 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Use of Formative Assessments and Data Driven Instruction ● Assessment practices for this upcoming school year focus on developing teachers in two areas: a) maximizing formative assessment practices b) using data analysis and trends to plan and implement targeted instruction. ● All Interdisciplinary and grade/subject common planning meetings are programmed into all teacher and paraprofessionals schedules at least 2 times a week. This allows for teachers to examine students test results and engage in conversations to differentiate instruction and share important resources. ● Implementation of the peer coaching model: a teacher working with a peer coach to plan and deliver a lesson. ● Peer collaborators/Model teachers will be conducting model lessons for a group of educators working on particular instructional practices. ● Staff share best practices by sending a video clip of her/his teaching to a Core Ready /LCI coach and a discussion follows in an online conference for feedback. ● Professional Learning Mondays – Every Monday there is an 80 minute block of time dedicated to professional learning for teachers. There is a professional development committee comprised of 10 teachers, that has informed a school wide professional learning plan implemented during these Monday blocks. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NOT APPLICABLE AT THIS TIME 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NOT APPLICABLE AT THIS TIME Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NOT APPLICABLE AT THIS TIME 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Math - Students are administered summative assessments (end of unit exams). - Students are provided with opportunities to examine which standard(s) they did not master. - Teachers then assigns work on IXL/Khan Academy/iReady which are Tutorial Programs which re-visit that particular standard. - Teachers/Math Lead Teacher in collaboration to create assessments that are specifically aligned to the CCLS by grades - Teachers/Math Lead Teacher use extensively Engage New York and previous state exams as templates for Mid Unite and End Unit Summative Assessments. - Teachers/Math Lead Teacher implement-On-The-Spot Assessments as Formative Assessments to gauge student progress. ELA -Students are administered summative assessments (end of unit exams). - Scholastic Reading Inventory (SRI) Approximately three (3) times during the school year the students Lexile Levels are reviewed and updated. - Monitors the student growth as well. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  - iReady Reading Program for Science and Social Studies. Using the Student Lexile Levels gives the reading material as well as questions at their Independent Level to avoid frustration. - Periodic Assessments are used throughout the year to monitor students progress towards mastering CCSS Standards. Initial baseline data is collected based on State Assessment results. This data is use to determine target standards for each grade in Literacy and Math. Periodic Assessments are then designed to address these standards as well as other standards as determined by NYS Assessment Guide- lines on Engage New York. These Periodic Assessments are given at the end of each Unit. Teachers then have an opportunity to review and design learning targets to addresses deficiencies and learning needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 633,058.00 16,979 122,619 0 25,816.00 0 4,945,628.00 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Section 5B Section 6-ELT Section 5 and 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy .JHS Mosholu Parkway Middle School 8080, Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. JHS Mosholu Parkway Middle School 8080, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. JHS Mosholu Parkway Middle School 80 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ∙ providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ∙ providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ∙ fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  ∙ providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ∙ sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ∙ providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ∙ actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ∙ engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ∙ ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ∙ support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ∙ maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ∙ conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  ∙ provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ∙ host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); ∙ schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ∙ translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ∙ conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ∙ holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ∙ hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ∙ encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ∙ supporting or hosting Family Day events; ∙ establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ∙ encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ∙ providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ∙ developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ∙ providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) JHS Mosholu Parkway Middle School 80, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ∙ using academic learning time efficiently; ∙ respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ∙ implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ∙ offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ∙ providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ∙ conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ∙ convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ∙ arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ∙ respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ∙ providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ∙ involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  ∙ providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ∙ ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ∙ ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ∙ notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ∙ arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ∙ planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ∙ creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ∙ assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ∙ sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ∙ supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ∙ ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ∙ advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ∙ monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ∙ ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ∙ check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ∙ read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ∙ set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ∙ promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ∙ encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ∙ volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ∙ participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ∙ communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ∙ respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ∙ become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ∙ participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ∙ take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ∙ share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ∙ attend school regularly and arrive on time; ∙ complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  ∙ follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ∙ show respect for myself, other people and property; ∙ try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ∙ always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Direct Instruction Supplemental Program will include language development through technology supported instruction. We will use the Rosetta Stone program and Newsela to provide our students with targeted language acquisition and content area support. Teachers will use NYSESLAT data to identify specific language needs and to differentiate instruction. The teachers will also use tasks aligned to the NYSESLAT to measure student progress, set learning goals, and create student groupings. The Common Branch Teacher is a Reading Specialist. The math teacher is a Spanish bilingual teacher. Program Goals: 1) Students gain the basic skills that they need to effectively use technology and digital tools, 2) Students improve their English language skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing by using the Rosetta Stone program, 3) Students improve their lexile levels by completing nonfiction literacy activities through Newsela, 4) Students obtain mastery of grade-level specific Mathematics CCLS by using Khan Academy, 5) Students monitor their progress by obtaining reports from the digital tools and conferencing with the teacher. Students use Rosetta Stone and Newsela daily during the after-school program for one hour to support language development. Students also develop and practice math skills using Khan Academy. One hour per week will be dedicated to students analyzing their progress and developing learning goals based on their individual data. The teachers will ensure to conference with students individually and in groups to provide feedback and to develop learning goals. NYSESLAT DATA: 2017 - 2018 Proficiency Levels GRADE ENTERING EMERGING TRANSITIONING EXPANDING 6 9 12 23 32 7 24 14 18 17 8 21 10 17 35 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Program Structure: Students are grouped by grade level. Each grade rotates on a daily basis to work on: 1) Language Development Digital tools are used to provide differentiated instruction and individualized support. Each student will have an individual Rosetta Stone account. The students progress through specific language development lessons at their own pace. The program provides immediate feedback and opportunities for review. The Rosetta Stone program tracks students' progress in the following areas: 1) oral language, 2) vocabulary, 3) comprehension. The students also use Newsela text as a support for close reading and annotating strategies. The reading teacher conducts individual student conferences. During the student conferences, students set goals based on their progress in the two programs. The teacher shares with students usage and performance data. The reading teacher also presents mini-lessons based on the digital tools data and observations during individual student conferences. 2) Math Concepts and Skills The math teacher assigns math "missions" as recommended by their math class teacher. The Khan Academy "missions" provide students with differentiated resources aligned to grade-level standards. The math teacher provides interventions through small group instruction based on the students' progress and completion of the "missions". 3) Homework Support and Independent Work Students have the opportunity to work with peers in completing homework assignments. The teachers also re-teach concepts and skills based on the questions that students pose about their homework. Planning - The Title III teachers have access to all of the students' data and digital tools. The two Title III teachers meet with classroom teachers during the school day to ensure that the Title III program's supports align to the concepts/skills that students are learning. The teachers have access to digital curriculum, programs, and tools that facilitate planning. Field Trips: We would like to expose students to cultural activities by taking field trips. We plan on taking the students to a performance at Lincoln Center and the Museum of Natural History. Subgroups and Grade Levels of Students to be Served: The targeted population will include 6-8 grade Entering, Emerging, Transitioning Schedule and Duration: The program is scheduled for the months of September 2018 - June 2019 Monday: 2:25-6:00pm; Tuesday thru Friday: 3:35-6:00pm, Saturday: 8:30am-1:00pm Language of Instruction: Students will be instructed in English with supports in Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Mandarin Teachers: 1 Common Branch Teacher, Reading Specialist 1 Math Bilingual Teacher Monday: 2 teachers x 1 hour x $60.00; Administrator: 1 supervisor x 1 hour x $63.45 Tuesday - Friday: 2 teachers x 2 hours 25 minutes x $60.00; Administrator: 1 supervisor x 2 hours 25 minutes x $63.45 Saturday: 2 teachers x 4.5 hours x $60.00; Administrator: 1 supervisor x 4.5 hours x $63.45 Language of Instruction: English and Native Language (Spanish, Bengali) Materials: Khan Academy - no cost Title III Headphones for laptops Technology Applications: Rosetta Stone, Newsela Admissions and transportation for Field Trips Teacher Planning Meetings: ENL and ELA teachers have 1 daily common preparation period and 1 daily common planning period (46 minutes = 1 period) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information ENL teachers meet 1 period weekly ENL teachers and content area teachers meet 1 period weekly in interdisciplinary teams Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: This school year, 2018 – 2019, we have six ENL teachers servicing our ELL population. All six teachers have less than three years of teaching experience with ELLs. We will provide our ENL teachers with a series of professional learning focusing on data analysis. Topics to be covered: Teachers to Receive Training: All ENL, Bilingual, and Content Area/Common Branch teachers providing support to our ELL students Schedule and Duration: Two sessions in September: 1 hour 45 minute sessions 3:45 – 5:30 Rationale: Analysis of data from the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT indicates that Speaking and Writing are a modality of need. We would like for teachers to understand the elements of teaching reading to ELLs will support speaking and writing. As part of this learning series, the teachers will complete an online course. The online course is designed to provide teachers and administrators with research on how English learners learn to read in a second language and the supports they need to be successful at decoding and comprehending. This online course is developed from CAL’s workbook and Study Guide, What’s Different about Teaching Reading to Students Learning English? Topics to be covered: Schedule and Duration: Four Sessions in October: 1 hour 45 minute sessions 3:45 – 5:30 Rationale: NYSESLAT (Spring 2017) data from the ELL Data Analysis Tool indicates that 33%(80/239) of our ELL students remained at same proficiency level. Teachers will use the NYSESLAT data to create tasks that support ELLs language needs. Additionally, they will participate in the self-paced online course: Fundamentals of Sheltered Instruction: Featuring the SIOP Model. The online course is designed to increase knowledge about how language is learned in the content area classroom and explore the characteristics and benefits of sheltered instruction. Grade 6 – 36 ELLs Grade 7 – 16 ELLs Grade 8 – 28 ELLs Topics to be covered: Teachers to receive training: All ENL, Bilingual, and Content Area/Common Branch teachers providing support to our ELL students. Schedule and Duration: Two Sessions in October: 1 hour 45 minute sessions 3:45 – 5:30 4. Data Analysis and NYS Assessments Rationale: This school year (2018-2019), most of our ELL will be taking the NYS ELA assessment. Teachers will use multiple measures to develop action plans for specific groups of students. The action plans will be shared with the ELA teachers and content area teachers. The 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  Part C: Professional Development action plans will include specific areas for targeted instruction as well as ESL strategies that address the students’ needs. Teachers will identify top five test-taking strategies to incorporate in daily instruction, including the use of glossaries. Topics to be covered: Teachers to receive training: All ENL, Bilingual, and Content Area/Common Branch teachers providing support to our ELL students. Schedule and Duration: Two Sessions in January: 1 hour 45 minute sessions 3:45 – 5:30 4. Introduction to Dual Language Education: Key Features and Best Practices Rationale: We will be opening a dual language program in September 2018. This new interactive, self-paced online course is designed to provide a comprehensive introduction to dual language education with a focus on the Three Pillars of dual language education used by successful programs. Topics to be covered: This online course provides participants with definitions of dual language education and outlines the fundamental components and goals of dual language programming and instruction. The online course links program features to the Three Pillars of dual language education and defines dual language education with examples from CAL and Santillana resources with recommended reading from noted experts in the field. Teachers to receive training: ALL ENL, Bilingual teachers in the dual language program. Schedule and duration: Two Sessions in October: 1 hour 45 minute sessions 3:45 – 5:30 Price: $199 per participant Name of provider - online self-paced course from CAL and Santillana USA 5. Academic Literacy Development for English Learners Rationale: Our school instructional focus encompasses literacy based instructional tasks across the content areas. This self-paced online course is designed to provide teachers and administrators with an overview of research-based approaches to academic literacy development for English learners (ELs) in the content classroom. Topics to be covered: Teachers to receive training: ALL ENL, bilingual teachers, general education, special education, content areas Schedule and duration: Two Sessions in December: 1 hour 45 minute sessions 3:45 – 5:30 Price: $125 per participant Name of provider - online self-paced course from CAL and Santillana USA Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Newly arrived immigrant parents will attend a series of sessions to help them understand the New York City High School Application Process. We would like parents to make informed decisions by understanding the requirements and criteria for specific High Schools. Topics to be covered: 1. High School Application Process 2. Student Profile 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 3. High School Profile 4. Identifying the best High School for my child Schedule and Duration: 2 hour sessions 9:00am – 11:00am Saturday, October November Rationale: Newly arrived immigrant parents will attend a workshop to understand our Standards Based Report Card. Topics to be covered: Schedule and Duration: 2 hour sessions 9:00am – 11:00am Saturday, October November ** How Parents will be notified of Activities: Two weeks prior to the workshop, phone calls will be made to parents to inform them of the workshop. A follow-up flyer will be sent to parents with students. Parents will indicate on the flyer if they will be attending the workshop and the form will be returned to the school. Parents will be called two days before the workshop to confirm their attendance. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 10 School Name Isobel Rooney Middle School 80 School Number 080 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Emmanuel Polanco Assistant Principal Carmen E. Soto Coach Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Austin Nojaim School Counselor Carlos Feliciano Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Maribel Torres-Hulla Parent Parent Coordinator Rosa Rodriguez Field Support Center Staff Member Jill Schimmel Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 6 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 684 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97 Total number of ELLs 235 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 34.36%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K 0 0 0 Spanish 2018-19 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 1 1 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use several baseline assessments for our ELLs. We analyze NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data to determine support by language modality. Additionally, we use iReady to obtain Reading and Math data. The iReady diagnostic test is administered three times per year. Our teachers monitor student progress on a weekly basis and use the iReady data to create instructional groupings. The data generated from the reports provide performance levels in the following domains: phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, and reading comprehension (informational and literary). We also administer common formative assessments every two weeks. The common formative assessments target one standard. We will use the Evaluación del desarrollo de la lectura (EDL/DRA in Spanish) to assess Spanish language proficiency for students in the Dual Language program. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  Our ENL teachers meet in September to set goals for the ENL students that they serve. They developed a strategic action plan based on NYSITELL and NYSESLAT. They meet with ELA teachers on a weekly basis to engage in student work review and to analyze reading data from common formative assessments and iReady. We revisit our ELL strategic action plan in January/February and set goals for student performance as well as instructional practices. In addition to working with the ELA teacher to provide integrated ENL support, the ENL teachers and ELA teachers have in their schedules designated times to provide targeted support. Our Dual Language teachers will also have common planning team meetings. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use the iReady Diagnostic Assessment as a baseline/benchmark assessment. We also use the iReady Standards Mastery Assessments to track student progress on a monthly basis. The iReady Instructional Grouping Profile report is used to prioritize the areas of need. The report provides student groupings based on five profiles. The profiles include descriptors in four areas - phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary, and reading comprehension. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have built-in two periods of Academic Intervention Services for each class. The class size is smaller during the AIS period as we assign some of the students to special area classes (music, art, dance). During the AIS period, the teachers provide small group and one-to-one instruction based on the iReady results. The teachers use the iReady Instructional Grouping Profile report for grouping and to set instructional goals. The ELA, ENL, and content area teachers provide targeted support during the EIR. The content area teachers use the same data to provide support during the AIS period. Our school also has an additional 75 minutes of instruction from Tuesday thru Friday. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use student results from the common formative assessments and iReady data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework. The ENL teachers develop a strategic action plan that includes specific instructional strategies based on student results. The teachers identify target students and track the support that they are provided. Common formative assessments and student work are used to determine student growth. We use the Student Profile Report for students that are lagging. This report provides a developmental analysis that highlights the student's most important area of need. It provides insight into the domain placement Lexiles to help teachers make decisions about instruction. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The 2017 - 2018 EDAT results from the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT reveal the following language proficiencies: Overall Grades 6-8 Entering - 45 Emerging - 39 Transitioning - 63 Expanding - 88 Commanding - 52 Grade 6 Entering - 8 Emerging - 13 Transitioning - 23 Expanding - 0 Commanding - 13 Grade 7 Entering - 18 Emerging - 15 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  Transitioning - 20 Expanding - 19 Commanding - 24 Grade 8 Entering - 18 Emerging - 11 Transitioning - 20 Expanding - 36 Commanding - 15 We use the NYSELAT data to evaluate and inform our ELL program. Additionally, we use progress reports generated from iReady. The iReady data provides each students' progress in reading. The Class Profile Report and the Instructional Grouping Profile Report are tools that we use to determine student performance by domain. We use this information to make decisions about the areas of instructional focus. The patterns in the data also guide us in determining the instructional practices that we use across the program. Our students also use myOn, a digital literacy program. In this program, students take an initial Lexile placement test and an interest inventory. The program generates a recommended book list at the student's level and interest. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? This data is shared in September/October during ENL team meetings. The ENL teachers share the data with ELA teachers during common interdisciplinary team meetings. We review the data on a monthly basis to compare to iReady data reports after iReady Diagnostic assessments. We also revisit the data when analyzing common formative assessments. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our students receive the required units of study as per CR Part 154.2. The students are grouped in classes by mixed proficiency levels and they remain as a class throughout the school day. The ENL teacher has a daily common planning period with ELA teachers. The ENL teacher ensures that planning is aligned to the ENL progressions and grade-level ELA CCSS. The ENL teachers co-teach with ELA teachers. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We include ENL units of studying both the teacher schedules and students' schedule. We consider the students' English Proficiency Levels based on the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL to place students in mixed proficiency classes. The ENL teacher collaborates with the ELA teacher. They use one of the six co-teaching models. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 100  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered by certified content area teachers. For the 2017-2018 school year, we are focusing on close reading strategies. ENL teachers provide targeted close reading strategies aligned to vocabulary and comprehension. To support accuracy and fluency ENL and ELA teachers provide direct instruction during the independent reading period. The independent reading period, EIR - Everyone is Reading, is scheduled four periods per week. The students receive support with phonemic awareness and phonics using the iReady instructional tool. Additionally, our ENL teachers incorporate ELL methodology and practices that support building academic vocabulary and building speaking/listening skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We will be administering the Evaluación del desarrollo de la lectura (EDL/DRA in Spanish) 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We will use the New Language Arts Progressions to design differentiated lessons that address the students’ different language proficiencies. We use Newsela, Commonlit, and myOn as resources to provide students with text based on the students' Lexile levels. SIFE Instructional Strategies—Direct Instruction, Oral Language Development, Home Language/Culture Activities, Thematic Units Technology Support—Rosetta Stone After school program—focus on language development (listening, speaking, vocabulary, grammar) using Rosetta Stone, Home language support using technology tools Newcomer Instructional Strategies—Direct Instruction, Explicit Skill Instruction, Guided Reading, Non-Linguistic Representations, Oral Language Development Technology Support—Rosetta Stone After school program—focus on language development (listening, speaking, vocabulary, grammar), Developing Instructional Strategies—Talk Moves, accountable talk, classroom discussions, Direct Instruction, Explicit Skill Instruction, Guided Reading (CAFE Strategies—Comprehension, Accuracy, Fluency, Expand Vocabulary), Technology Support—iReady After School Program—focus on reading and writing strategies, iReady (Phonics, Vocabulary) Reading Comprehension (iReady, Newsella) Reading fluency and accuracy (myOn) Long Term Instructional Strategies—Guided Reading, Explicit Vocabulary Instruction, (CAFE Strategies), Summarizing and Note-taking, Academic Language Learning Approach Technology Support—iReady After School Program—focus on reading and writing strategies, iReady (Phonics, Vocabulary) Reading Comprehension (iReady, Newsella) Reading fluency and accuracy (myOn) Former ELLs Up to two years after exiting ELL status Instructional Support—Learning Strategies, Reading and Writing Skills, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 101  Technology Support— iReady After School Program—Homework Support 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs employ a variety of strategies that support curricular and instructional flexibility. We use a reading skills framework for planning instruction. Mini-lessons focus on vocabulary strategies and comprehension strategies. The teachers also use iReady teacher lessons and planning tools to support phonics, vocabulary, and reading comprehension skills. The ENL teachers also focus on using strategies for building academic vocabulary and engaging students in discourse to support content area learning. During common planning time and team meeting time, teachers engage in the “student work protocol” and the data-driven protocol to make adjustments to the curriculum and identify instructional strategies that meet student needs. Additionally, teachers use a variety of scaffolding techniques and routines consistent with the New York State P-12 Common Core Learning Standards. The research-based scaffolding techniques include teaching academic vocabulary across several days using a variety of techniques; integrating oral and written English language instruction into content area teaching; providing regular opportunities to develop written language skills; building background knowledge; clarifying content delivered in a second language; capitalizing on students’ home language skills and knowledge, explicit academic language instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teachers use instructional strategies that focus on comprehension strategies and vocabulary instruction. ENL teachers collaborate with ELA teachers to incorporate strategies for developing cognitive academic language. ENL teachers have access to all content area curriculum and they identify specific language and content objectives for their lessons. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, Science, Social Studies include: SIFE and Newcomer students receive additional language support using the Rosetta Stone language learning tool. Teachers use weekly reports to access each student’s language progress and the amount of time that they spend in the program. The program has build-in formative assessments that provide students with immediate feedback and opportunities to practice language skills. The students use this program during the EIR period only for the first six weeks that they are enrolled in our school. After six weeks, they use Rosetta Stone for two days per week. We then add myON as an independent reading program. The students have the opportunity to read self-selected books. Developing and long-term ELLs use the iReady Program. This program provides individualized lessons. Teachers use the assessment reports to diagnose, plan instruction, monitor progress, and assign lessons. During the after-school program teachers address individual student needs and group students based on subgroups. SIFE and recently arrived students receive basic language skills support and are enrolled in Rosetta Stone. Emerging, transitioning, and expanding students are provided with targeted reading comprehension instruction and support with writing skills. These students also have the opportunity to practice mathematics skills. We incorporate the use of math technology tools--Khan Academy. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on the growing number of Spanish speaking students, we are planning on implementing a Dual Language program for the 2018-2019 school year. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 102  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. All of our students have a MacBook Air providing them with access to technology support that meets their needs. Content area teachers present the same curriculum to our ELLs. The teachers use native language support and technology to scaffold and modify the learning activities. The teachers design lessons using the Google platform. During the after-school program, the students have the same access to technology and digital tools. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following technology will be used to support ELLs: 1. ELA/Social Studies/Science—Pearson, Newsela, CommonLit 2. Language Development--Rosetta Stone 3. Reading Skills--iReady, myOn 4. Math Support - iReady, Khan Academy 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language Support will be provided during instruction as follows: ENL teachers will provide native language support by teaching students how to use the glossaries. ENL teachers also use cooperative learning strategies to group students by home language. Additionally, the digital tools that are provided also have Spanish language support. One of the math digital tools, IXL, provides support in other languages in addition to Spanish. Also, the teachers use translation web-based resources and assignments. The students are able to navigate through these resources since each student has a laptop. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. We ensure that all required services support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade level by using the CCSS and the New Language Arts Progressions as a framework for the curriculum, assessments and programs that we implement. The specific grade CCSS outline the expected content and skills that students need to know. Teachers plan learning experiences that are aligned to the grade specific CCSS and that reflect the New Language Arts progressions. We are also using Newsela and CommonLit to provide students with rich text at their Lexile levels. Additionally, the technology instructional tools (iReady, Rosetta Stone) are adaptive tools that meet students at their individual levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? NA 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year, we hold a parent orientation in August. This event provides parents and their child the opportunity to meet school staff as well as other families that are new to the school. Throughout the school year, we hold monthly parent activities. The parent coordinator ensures to extend personal invitations to parents that are new to our school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 103  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development plan will focus on Close Reading and differentiation for ELLs and SWDs. The professional development will be facilitated by district personnel as well as the school’s assistant principal. Through these sessions, teachers will learn a variety of strategies for building vocabulary, academic language support, and engaging students in conversations. We will also provide professional development on the New Language Arts Progressions to all teachers that provide support for ELLs. ENL teachers will engage in professional development to address differentiation for students by understanding the New Language Arts Progressions. Additionally, the teachers will receive additional training on topics related to changes in the CR Part 154, NYSESLAT. To support all staff in using instructional strategies to support all ELL subgroups, ENL professional learning on research-based instructional strategies for ELLs and provide turnkey training to their colleagues. The instructional strategies will focus on vocabulary and language development in the content area, as well as engaging ELLs in student-to-student discussions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The professional development requirements will be met during the Monday designated professional learning days. We will also hold follow-up sessions during content area/grade-level team meetings. We use paper and electronic forms to keep records of: PD agenda, teacher attendance sheets, and copies of materials and resources provided. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We provide annual meetings with parents of ELLs in November to inform parents of the language program and to present to parents supports available during the after school program and extended time. We also provide parents with a meeting in February to communicate students' progress and provide information about the NYSESLAT. We secure translators for the parent meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. We plan a variety of meetings targeting topics relevant to ELL middle school parents. The Parent Coordinator sends newsletters to parents on a monthly basis informing them of the different parent workshops and activities. In September, we have Parent Orientation Night to inform parents about the language programs offered, Transitional Bilingual (Spanish) and Free Standing ENL, information about the path to monolingual ELA classes, and a parent orientation video for families of ELLs. Parent orientations are conducted by parent coordinators with the assistance of school administration, ELL specialists, bilingual/ENL coordinators or bilingual/ENL teachers. Also in September, we host "Curriculum Night" offering parents an opportunity to learn about the school's ELL curriculum and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 104  how it is aligned to the Common Core State Standards. ELL teachers, Lead teachers, administrators, the parent coordinator, and community associates participate in this activity. We have also scheduled throughout the year, "Skedula Workshop for Parents of ELLs" to assist parents in tracking their students academic progress. The workshop is facilitated by the Parent Coordinator and Community Associate. Also, we encourage parents of our ELLs to participate in adult literacy programs offered by the New York City Office of Adult and Continuing Education (OACE). Classes are offered in classes in Adult Basic Education, High School Equivalency (GED), English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) and Career and Technical Education (CTE). Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 105 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Emmanuel Polanco, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 106  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS80 School DBN: 10X080 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Emmanuel Polanco Title Principal Carmen E. Soto Assistant Principal Rosa Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Austin Nojaim ENL/Bilingual Teacher Nelva Garate Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Carlos Feliciano School Counselor Jill Schimmel NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 02/02/18 02/02/18 02/02/18 02/02/18 02/02/18 02/02/18 02/02/18 02/02/18 2018-19 CEP-RISE 107  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x80 School Name: Isobel Rooney Middle School 80 Superintendent: MaribelTorres- The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Carmen Soto Assistant Principal Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use the Home Language Identification Survey and the Student Emergency Contact cards to identify parents' language preference. Additionally, throughout the school-year teachers are assigned student advisory groups. Specific teachers become the point person for parent contact. Teachers also gather information about parent's preferred mode of communication--email, text message, or phone calls. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 108  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Arabic 487 361 89 17 49% 36% 9% 2% 481 367 90 14 48% 37% 9% 1% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Handbook September - ongoing After-school Program Information September - ongoing ELL Program Parent Notification Letters September - ongoing 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Orientation September/October Parent Teacher October New ELL Parent Orientation September, ongoing Curriculum Night October 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 109  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Designated bilingual staff will be identified to provide translation for parents. These identified staff will make phone calls and translate for teachers as well. Parents are also informed that they may identify a relative or friend that can serve as their translator. The DOE translation unit will be used as necessary. Translation services will be provided for all parental communications including but not limited to the following: - Parent surveys - Parent letters and notices - Parent phone calls - Parent flyers/newsletter Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use parent surveys that will be provided during parent meetings to gather feedback from parents. We will also make telephone calls to targeted groups of parents to obtain specific information. For example, calling parents of a specific language background. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 110 
