2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X094 School Name: P.S. 094 KINGS COLLEGE SCHOOL Principal: DIANE DAPROCIDA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Kings College School 321000010094 K - 5 School Number (DBN): 10x094 3530 Kings College Place Bronx NY 10467 718-405-6345 Phone Number: 718-405-6358 Fax: Diane Da Procida-Sesin ddaproc@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Diane Da Procida-Sesin Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Valerie Dash FelishaRahaman AlerisQuinones RajRoy N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 10 MaribelHulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Road Bronx NY 10458 Room 836 Superintendent’s Office Address: mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718.741.5852 Phone Number: 718.741.7098 Fax: Bronx (District 10) FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718.828-7776 Phone Number: 718.828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Diane DaProcida-Sesin Valerie Dash Felicia Rahaman RajRoy N/A Teresa Cutler-Rosa Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) EvensRegistre Brian Blatt Dustin Bermudez ElviaParajito Petra Burgos YaliaSerrano Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Kings College School Mission Statement "We nurture and inspire lifelong leadership"  We are all learners and life long leaders.  We work together to be successful.  We celebrate and appreciate our differences and we learn from each other.  We motivate each other and try our best to always do what is right even when no one is looking. Kings College Vision Statement At P.S. 94x, we are lifelong leaders and we have high expectations. Our acronym is: Look to help Earn respect Admire success Don't give up We build o community of lifelong leaders when we use the 7 Habits. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Contextual Information Kings College School is located in the Northwest section of the Bronx, known as Norwood and sometimes, Bainbridge. The neighborhood is triangular shaped and defined by the historic Woodlawn Cemetery on the north, the New York Botanical Gardens on the east, and Mosholu Parkway on the south; Oval Reservoir, which now a NYC Park, sits in it's center. Norwood is a multi-ethnic enclave with working class families. Montefiore Medical Center is the economic hub of our community. Kings College School, P.S. 94x, is one of the largest neighborhood zoned elementary schools in New York City. We currently have 1274 students enrolled. The school campus is located in the Norwood section of the Bronx and consists of two full service buildings. There are 54 classes in total. The Annex houses ten kindergarten classes, nine first grade classes and five second grade classes. The Main Building houses four second grade classes, nine third grade classes, nine fourth grade classes and eight fifth grade classes. There are six Transitional Bilingual Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes, 11 mono-lingual ICT classes, and 11 self-contained special education classes. All general education classes are heterogeneously grouped. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  Kings College School is a diverse community. Twenty-eight (28) percent of our students are English Language Learners. Sixty-six (66) percent of our students are of Hispanic origin, eighteen (18) percent are Black, ten (10) percent are Asian, and three (3) percent are White. Thirty-one (31) percent of our students have Individualized Education Programs (IEPs). Ninety -two (92) percent of our students are eligible for free lunch. Strategic partnerships 1. Teaching Matters Institute (TMI) partnership supports the professional learning needs of supervisors and teachers in literacy and math. We will continue to partner with them this year. 2. Math Solutions: We will continue to partner with Math Solutions this year with a particular focus on strengthening student fluency in number relationships, and strengthening teacher pedagogy in the Math Workshop model with particular emphasis in using formative assessment and differentiation. 4. Robin Hood Library Grant: Provides full-time licensed librarian and teacher's aide. Instruction and resources are aligned to the literacy, social studies and science curricula. The library also offers open access hours during and after school, parent workshops, and numerous enrichment activities. 5. Universal Literacy Coaching: We have two Ulit Coaches who support our teachers in the K - 2 band with deepening their pedagogy skills in the area of literacy. 6. United Federation of Teachers Teacher Center (UFTTC) Coach: The UFT Center Coach provides support for developing and implementing cycles of professional learning, new teacher support through modeled lessons and peer observation cycles of learning, development and revision of units of study in literacy and math pacing calendars. UFT Teacher Center Coach works with our ULit coaches to coordinate learning walks and inter- visitations with the TMI coaching staff, teachers and administrators for the purpose of strengthening teacher pedagogy in the teaching of reading and writing using formative assessments and differentiation. 7. Out of School Time (OST) Programs: Wraparound after school programming provides after school activities for 250 students in kindergarten through fifth grade, on site and off-site, as well as during some school holidays and the summer months. 8. Cook Shop Classroom for kindergarten and first grade classes provides unit plans, materials and food to teach students about healthy food choice and preparation. There is also a parent component that offers six workshops throughout the year teaching parents how to choose and prepare healthy meals. 9. Cool Culture Pass for all kindergarten families provides a year of free access to cultural institutions throughout New York City. 10. ELL/SWD Grant - Partnership with Arts Horizons will fund during school Hip Hop and STEP dance classes for seven upper grade classes the Spring semester. 11. Intercultural Development Research Association (IDRA ) sponsors the Coca-Cola Valued Youth Program. This is a research based, internationally-recognized dropout prevention program. The program identifies youth who are considered at risk of dropping out of school and places them as tutors of lower grade students who are also struggling in school. The program also supports them with positive recognition and instruction. 12. Mighty Milers clubs sponsors running activities that are led by teachers for students in kindergarten through second grades. 13. We will continue to implement a school-wide initiative focused on providing more support and development of the social-emotional well-being of our students. We partner with the Franklin Covey Co. using "The Leader in Me" 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  whole-school transformation process. The process involves teaching leadership and life skills to students to create a culture of student empowerment based on the idea that every child can be a leader. 14. As part of Thrive NYC, we are receiving services from the School Mental Health Consultant Program (SMHCP) which promotes mental health in our community, assists in creating a Mental Health Work Plan for our school, identifies community resources and provides staff training and consultation to address mental health concerns of students. 15. We will continue our partnership with Studios in A School with our fourth and fifth grade students. Studios in a School provides quality visual arts instruction with an artist in residence. We will also continue to provide weekend family visual arts workshops during the fall and spring semesters. 16. We will continue to partner with Boy Scouts to provide quality after school programs as well as scouting trips for boys in first through fifth grade. 17. Morningside Center for Social Responsibility: For the past two years, we have partnered with Morningside to bring restorative circles to classes in our kindergarten through second grade band. In addition to his the Positive Learning Collaborative trained teachers in our three through five band. We will continue our partnership with Morningside with the purpose of strengthening our use Restorative Circles throughout the school. This pas summer eight staff members, including the Principal were trained in Educating for Racial Equity, we plan to use the resources we received as well as the training content to educate our staff in this area. 18. CUNY Tech Internship Program: We have partnered with CUNY Tech Internship Program for the past two years and will continue partnering with them this current year. 19. This year we will participate in the Teacher Leader Program sponsored by the NYCDOE. We have designated two teachers in the upper grades (one on four and one five) as Peer Collaborative teachers, and one on third grade as a Model Teacher. 20. This year we will partner with Turnaround for Children for the purpose of deepening our understanding of how early trauma affects student engagement and learning in school, in order to better respond to, and implement more individualized programs to promote student recovery and positive social skills learning. 21. Councilman Grant - Power My Learning: Grant received from the Councilman will provide full year of use on the Power My Learning web based program, and 60 desktop computers for home use, to be distributed to families in March. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have several special student and family populations who have very specific needs.  Shelter and doubled - up students: This population continues to grow in our community. When our families are displaced, they work very hard to keep their children in our school, often times commuting for over an hour on mass transit. Students who have such a long commute are tired and hungry during the morning school hours. We ensure that they receive food no matter what time in the morning they arrive and communicate with the teacher so that they are aware of the circumstances. Many times students will need a temporary adult mentor or counseling services because they are overwhelmed with temporary living arrangements and struggle with making sense of what is going on in their lives.  Newly arrived immigrant families: As in the past, we receive approximately 50 "new to the country"  immigrant families from Central and South America, Africa and Asia. While each family may have more specific needs as we get to know them, overall they are overwhelmed. They are fearful of a new land, community and school; they struggle with trust issues unless they have a family member they know well who comes with them. In response to this, we established a family welcome team of students and parents who are fluent in the native languages of our new families as well as English. A member of the welcome team will reach out to the adult family member in their native language to arrange a get together where they will receive a tour of the school, refreshments and meet other students who also speak their language so that they may share their experiences about our school. Our Parent Coordinator will also reach out through our translator to ascertain if support services are needed for any reason. Students with Disabilities: Twenty (30) percent of our students receive special education and related services. All of our students are ambulatory. In response to their specific learning needs in literacy, we have consistently provided small group instruction in Fundations (kindergarten through second grade band students), Wilson Language System (third through fifth grade band students) and Just Words( SWD/ENL students). Students with disabilities who are able to decode but lack understanding of what they are reading receive small group guided reading instruction. Math instruction is scaffolded during the math block based on identified student needs. Students with disabilities who struggle socially or emotionally with remaining on baseline receive small group counseling services to increase the amount of time that they are able to remain in the classroom. They may also have a 1:1 paraprofessional who is trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Systems.  Mental illness: For the past two years we have seen a large increase in the number of students who struggled significantly with being able to make safe decisions regarding their physical and mental well-being. We will continue our partnership with ThriveNYC to support the mental health of our students and their families. In addition to this we will also partner with Turnaround for Children for the purpose becoming a more trauma informed community. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2017 - 2018 School Quality Guide Results Areas in which Kings College School made the most progress over the past year: We continued to improve overall on both the Framework Survey Element Scores  Rigorous Instruction: Framework Element school improved .22 from 3.08 to 3.30/Survey Element score improved from.90 from 1.80 to 2.70.  Collaborative Teachers: Framework Element school improved .50 from 2.91 to 3.41 /Survey Element score improved 1.00 from 2.31 to 3.31. Supportive Environment: Survey Element score improved .54 from 1.54 to 2.08.   Effective School Leadership: Framework Element school improved .12 from 3.36 to 3.48/Survey Element score  improved .28 from 3.16 to 3.44. Strong Family/Community Ties: Framework Element school improved .97 from 2.66 to 3.53/Survey Element score improved 1.02 from 2.25 to 3.27. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  Trust: Framework Element school improved .48 from 3.28 to 3.86/Survey Element score improved .48 from 3.28 to 3.86. Sub categories that we demonstrated improvement in based on teacher responses: Rigorous Instruction: In Literacy, 95% of the teachers reported that they had the resources they needed to implement their programs (up from 86% last year). In Math 91% of the teachers reported that they had the resources they needed to implement their programs (up from 87% last year. Collaborative Teachers: Cultural Awareness and Inclusive Classroom Instruction- Teacher response improved in this area from 89% to 95%. Vertical articulation was a specific focus last year and will continue to be this year. Peer Collaboration- Teacher responses improved 9% with 81% of teachers agreeing that as a school we do make a conscious effort to coordinate teaching with instruction at other grade levels, up from 72% last year. Quality of Professional Development - Teacher responses improved 15% in this area with 79% responding favorably up from 64%: the previous year. Supportive Environment: Safety - Teachers responses improved significantly by 47% in this area with 85% responding favorably up from 38%: the previous year. Social Emotional - Teachers responses improved slightly in this area with 83% responding favorably up from 76% last year. Effective School Leadership: Inclusive Leadership-Teacher responses remained high in this category with 95% reporting positively both this school year and last school year. Instructional Leadership- Teachers continued to respond positively with 90% responses being positive this year, last year 91% responded favorably. Strong Family-Community Ties: Outreach to Parents- Families continued to respond positively with 96% reporting favorably this school year, a slight 3% improvement from last year's responses of 93%. Parent Involvement in School-Overall continued to remain the same with 86% of our families responding favorably up from 84% the previous year. Trust: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  In all categories Trust remained high. Parent -Principal Trust: 96% of families responded positively this year, up from 94% last year. Parent- Teacher Trust Improved slightly this year to 97%, up from 95% last year. Teacher- Principal Trust Improved as well, with 88% of the teachers responding positively this year, up from 79% last year. Teacher to Teacher Trust improved slightly this year with 85% of the teachers responding positively this year, up from 82% last year. Areas of Focus for the coming year based on School Learning Survey 2017-2018 Results: Rigorous Instruction Academic Press is still an area of focus- Fewer teachers reported that are responding to challenging questions both in class and on tests (37% and 45% respectively.). Course clarity/Quality of Student Discussion is still an area of focus - More teachers reported that students are building on each others ideas during class discussions- 58% (up from 49%: the previous year).Fewer teachers reported that students are using data or text references to support their ideas- 44% (down from 49% the previous year). Half the teachers reported that students are able to provide constructive feedback to their peers and teachers. Collaborative Teachers Innovation and Collective Responsibility- Teachers responses improved only slightly this year with 76% responding favorably this year up from 74% last year. Supportive Environment Classroom Behavior only improved slightly from last year's results with 55% responding positively overall around classroom behavior up from 51%: last year. Peer Support for Academic Work did improved slightly with 63% of teachers responding positively overall up from 57% last year. There was also a significant decline in teachers' responses around students feeling that homework is important with 44% of teachers responding favorably this year down from 63% last year. Additional Survey Questions 60% of teachers responded that order and discipline are maintained in their school. 25% of teachers responded that students RARELY or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. Provide time for collaboration on the use of data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X094 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1261 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 133 133 41 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 90.8% % Reduced Lunch 26.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.4% 67.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.26 0% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 22.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 55% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 150 148 90.7% 2.2% 21.8% 17.4% 9.0% 2.8% 8 7% 10 14.4% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A NO NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality impleme2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  ntation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of stud2018-19 SCEP-FF 21 ents. 2017-2018 School Quality Guide: Rigorous Instruction In Literacy, 95% of the teachers reported that they had the resources they needed to implement their programs (up from 86% last year). In Math 91% of the teachers reported that they had the resources they needed to implement their programs (up from 87% last year. 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review/Measures of Leadership Practice Summative Feedback QR Indicator 1.1: Curriculum- School leaders and faculty understand the importance of curricula being aligned to CCLS and/or content standards. The school has begun working on integrating the instructional shifts, and building coherence and promoting college and career readiness for all students. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data so that a diversity of learners, including English Language Learners (ELLs ) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs), have access to the curricula and tasks and are cognitively challenged. The school communicates and supports a culture of high expectations. Quality Review Report 2016 - 2017:    SOP 3.2 Instructional Core - We received proficient in all areas. SOP 3.3 Systems for improvement - We received proficient in all areas. SOP 3.2 Additional Finding- 1.1 Curriculum - Proficient o Findings: All curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and integrate the instructional shifts. There is coherence across grades and subject areas that promote college and career readiness, rigorous habits and higher order thinking skills. Impact: The school's curricular decisions build on coherence and rigorous habits for all learners. Across grades and content areas, academic tasks push student thinking. o SOP 3.4: During the 2017 - 2018 school year we made significant strides in SOP 3.4. Teachers on grade, between grade and with cluster teacher input (visual arts, technology, science, math, social studies and Leader In Me) developed enrichment projects focused on units of study in math, ELA, science, social studies, physical education, and health education. Students tasks included creating power point presentations, research papers, dioramas, posters, poems, songs and mini-skits, we displayed their work and students presented their projects to peers and parents, several times throughout the year. We will continue and deepen this work this year. Areas of Focus for the coming year: 3.2 The school leader ensures and support2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  s the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  the needs of students. NEW YORK STATE ENGLISH LANGUAGE ARTS STATE TEST ANALYSIS READING AND WRITING PROGRESS AS MEASURED BY STUDENT PERFORMANCE IN GRADES THREE THROUGH FIVE ON THE NEW YORK STATE ENGLISH LANGUAGE ARTS STATE TEST 2017-2018 Grade THREE OVERALL LEVEL 3 & 4 PERFORMANCE INCREASED FROM 16.6 TO 23.5   OVERALL LEVEL 1 PERFORMANCE DECREASED FROM 50.8 TO 39.8 Reading Strengths: RI 3.2: Determine the main idea of a text; recount the key details and explain how they support the main idea. RI 3.3 Describe the relationship between a series of historical events, scientific ideas or concepts, or steps in technical procedures in a text, using language that pertains to time, sequence, and cause/effect. RI 3.4 Determine the meaning of general academic and domain-specific words and phrases in a text relevant to a grade 3 topic or subject area. RL 3.6 Distinguish their own point of view from that of the narrator or those of the characters. Reading Weaknesses: L.3.4 Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple-meaning word and phrases based on grade three reading and content, choosing flexibly from a range of strategies. Comparable to NYC RI.3.5 Use text features and search tools (e.g., key words, sidebars, hyperlinks) to locate information relevant to a given topic efficiently. RI.3.7 Use information gained from illustrations (e.g., maps, photographs) and the words in a text to demonstrate understanding of the text (e.g., where, when, why, and how key events occur). RL.3.2 Recount stories, including fables, folktales, and myths from diverse cultures; determine the central message, lesson, or moral and explain how it is conveyed through key details in the text. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  RL 3.3 Describe characters in a story (e.g., their traits, motivations, or feelings) and explain how their actions contribute to the sequence of events RL.3.4 Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, distinguishing literal from non-literal language. Writing to Sources Strengths: None Weaknesses: RI.3.3, RI.3.7 Comparable: RI.3.8, RL3.3, RL.3.5, RI.3.2 Grade four OVERALL LEVEL 3 & 4 PERFORMANCE INCREASED SLIGHTLY FROM 20.7 TO 21.6   OVERALL LEVEL 1 PERFORMANCE DECREASED FROM 43.7 TO 38.9 Reading Strengths: L.4.4 Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple-meaning words and phrases based on grade four reading and content, choosing flexibly from a range of strategies. RI 4.3 Explain events, procedures, ideas, or concepts in a historical, scientific, or technical text, including what happened and why, based on specific information in the text. Reading Weaknesses: RL.4.6 Compare and contrast the point of view from which different stories are narrated, including the difference between first- and third-person narrations. Comparable to NYC RI.4.2 Determine the main idea of a text and explain how it is supported by key details; summarize the text. RI.4.4 Determine the meaning of general academic and domain-specific words or phrases in a text relevant to a grade 4 topic or subject area. R!.4.5 Describe the overall structure (e.g., chronology, comparison, cause/effect, problem/solution) of events, ideas, concepts, or information in a text or part of a text. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  RI.4.7 Interpret information presented visually, orally, or quantitatively (e.g., in charts, graphs, diagrams, time-lines, animations, or interactive elements on Web pages) and explain how the information contributes to an understanding of the text in which it appears. RL.4.2 Determine a theme of a story, drama, or poem from details in the text; summarize the text. RL.4.4 Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, including those that allude to significant characters found in mythology (e.g., Herculean). Writing to Sources Strengths: None Weaknesses: RI.4.2, RL.4.4 Comparable: RI.4.3, RL 4.2, RL.4.6 Grade five OVERALL LEVEL 3 & 4 PERFORMANCE INCREASED FROM 12.5 TO 21.6   OVERALL LEVEL 1 PERFORMANCE DECREASED FROM 54.9 TO 50.0 Reading Strengths: RI.5.2 Determine two or more main ideas of a text and explain how they are supported by key details; summarize the text. RI.5.7 Draw on information from multiple print or digital sources, demonstrating the ability to locate an answer to a question quickly or to solve a problem efficiently. Reading Weaknesses: L.5.4 Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple-meaning words and phrases based on grade five reading and content, choosing flexibly from a range of strategies. RI.5.5 Compare and contrast the overall structure (e.g., chronology, comparison, cause/effect, problem/solution) of events, ideas, concepts, or information in two or more texts. Comparable to NYC RI.5.3 Explain the relationships or interactions between two or more individuals, events, ideas, or concepts in a historical, scientific, or technical text based on specific information in the text. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  RI.5.4 Determine the meaning of general academic and domain-specific words and phrases in a text relevant to a grade 5 topic or subject area. RI.5.6 Analyze multiple accounts of the same event or topic, noting important similarities and differences in the point of view they represent. RL.5.2 Determine a theme of a story, drama, or poem from details in the text, including how characters in a story or drama respond to challenges or how the speaker in a poem reflects upon a topic; summarize the text. RL.5.3 Compare and contrast two or more characters, settings, or events in a story or drama, drawing on specific details in the text (e.g., how characters interact). RL.5.4 Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, including figurative language such as metaphors and similes. RL.5.5 Explain how a series of chapters, scenes, or stanzas fits together to provide the overall structure of a particular story, drama, or poem. RL.5.6 Describe how a narrator’s or speaker’s point of view influences how events are described. Writing to Sources Strengths: RI.5.3, RI.5.5 Weaknesses: RI.5.7, RI.5.2 Comparable: RI.5.8, RI.5.2 Reading Progress as Measured by Student Beginning of Year and End of Year Performance using FOUNTAS and Pinnell Reading Inventory 2017 - 2018 This year we switched over to the revised version of the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Inventory. The reason for this change is that we observed students performing better on the previous version of this inventory, but these results were not transferring over to the NYState ELA test results. The transition over to the revised version gave us a clearer understanding of the deficits our students have. Across the board (all grade levels) saw a significant drop in levels of performance on the fall assessment and the spring assessment. Our 2017-2018 CEP goal was not met. Overall 29.2% of students met or exceeded their grade level benchmark. Fountas and Pinnell Reading Inventory Results 2017 -2018 Student Population Fourth Grade through Kindergarten Scoring Level Three or Four Fourth Grade student Progress  26% of students overall met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. -1% change from the beginning of the school year.  44% of general education students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. 0% change from the beginning of the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27   13% of Students with Disabilities (SWDs) met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. 0% change from the beginning of the school year.  5% of English Language Learner (ELL) students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. 0% change from the beginning of the school year  0% of SWDs/ELLs students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. -5% change from the beginning of the school year. Third Grade Student Progress  25% of students overall met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. -6% change from the beginning of the school year  42% of general education students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. -10% change from the beginning of the school year.  7% of Students with Disabilities (SWDs) met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +4% change from the beginning of the school year.  11% of English Language Learner (ELL) students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +1% change from the beginning of the school year  0% of SWDs/ELLs students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. -5% change from the beginning of the school year. second Grade Student Progress  30% of students overall met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. -1% change from the beginning of the school year  45% of general education students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. -2% change from the beginning of the school year.  13% of Students with Disabilities (SWDs) met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +3% change from the beginning of the school year.  9% of English Language Learner (ELL) students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +4% change from the beginning of the school year  6% of SWDs/ELLs students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. -12% change from the beginning of the school year first Grade Student Progress  31% of students overall met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +16% change from the beginning of the school year  46% of general education students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +26% change from the beginning of the school year.  8% of Students with Disabilities (SWDs) met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. -2% change from the beginning of the school year.  8% of English Language Learner (ELL) students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +5% change from the beginning of the school year  11% of SWDs/ELLs students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +10% change from the beginning of the school year. kindergarten Student Progress  35% of students overall met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +32% change from the beginning of the school year  46% of general education students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +43% change from the beginning of the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28   26% of Students with Disabilities (SWDs) met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +23% change from the beginning of the school year.  12% of English Language Learner (ELL) students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +12% change from the beginning of the school year  7% of SWDs/ELLs students met or exceeded the standard by the end of the school year. +3% change from the beginning of the school year. ANALYSIS OF STUDENT PERFORMANCE DATA BASED ON FOUNTAS AND PINNELL READING INVENTORY RESULTS We did not meet our target of overall performance increase of 40%. Student fall baseline data indicated that 18% were reading on or above grade level, end of year performance indicated that student overall progress increased 10% to 28%. Student performance in the early grades (kindergarten and first grade) increased across all accountability groups. In second through fifth grade student performance either did not increase and/or decreased across all accountability groups. 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review/Measures of Leadership Practice Summative Feedback QR indicator: 1.1 Curriculum: Some students are fully engaged in classroom tasks. Continue to leverage strengths in teacher teams by helping support best practices in literacy and mathematics. Continue to focus on increasing the rigor and CCLS aligned tasks and expectations through development of planning tools that support teachers with creating instructional plans that include more opportunities for higher order thinking skills rather than just content specific tasks. 2017-2018 School Quality Guide: Rigorous Instruction Academic Press is still an area of focus- Fewer teachers reported that students are responding to challenging questions both in class and on tests (37% and 45% respectively.). Course clarity/Quality of Student Discussion is still an area of focus - More teachers reported that students are building on each others ideas during class discussions- 58% (up from 49%: the previous year).However, fewer teachers reported that students are using data or text references to support their ideas- 44% (down from 49% the previous year). Additionally, half the teachers reported that students are able to provide constructive feedback to their peers and teachers. NEXT STEPS FOR 3.2 1. We will work and plan collaboratively to consistently teach and use academic and content level vocabulary during all lessons and all areas of our school community, which will result in students' increased understanding and accurate use of said vocabulary both orally and through written discourse. 2. We will work and plan collaboratively to develop and consistently use scaffolds to teach academic and content level vocabulary for students who are second language learners and/or below grade level speakers and writers, which will result in student use and understanding of content level vocabulary demonstrated by improved oral discourse and higher-level writing. 3. We will work and plan collaboratively to create and consistently use higher order question structures such as Bloom's Taxonomy, Hess and Webb's Higher Order Questions during discussion sessions which will result in increased opportunities for students to use their academic and content level vocabulary in order to explain their thinking and advance their learning. 3.5 Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30 learning. Quality Review 2016- 2017 SOP 3.5 -Additional Finding- 2.2 Assessment- Proficient   Findings: Assessment, including common assessments and ongoing checks for understanding are aligned to the school's curricula and are used strategically in most classrooms to make adjustments and push students to think critically. Impact: Most teachers assess student learning effectively leading to targeted interventions, varied scaffolds and shared instructional planning. Curricula and instruction are refined to meet all student learning needs. 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review/Measures of Leadership Practice Summative Feedback 2.2 Assessment: Continue to deepen teachers' skills in the use of formative assessment practices, as well as student self-assessment, so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet students' learning needs during daily classroom lessons. While teachers are learning about their students through discussions, reviewing student work and utilizing checklists and/or rubrics, checks for understanding during classroom visits were limited. 2017-2018 DTSDE School Self Reflection Tenet 3 - Curriculum- We need to strengthen how we look at students' work in order to meet the needs of all learners in whole group, and small group instruction. Teachers focus more on using summative data to make adjustments in curriculum or units for the following year. We need systems in place to constantly look at data to plan effective lessons to meet the needs of all learners. NEXT steps FOR 3.5 1. We wiill create a looking a student work (LASW) calendar with non-negotiable dates dedicated to increasing teacher pedagogy in teaching reading and writing. 2. Train teacher leaders in LASW protocols so that conversations can continue resulting in adjustments to curriculum being made throughout the year for all learners, and build LASW sessions into yearlong assessment calendar. 3. Consistently use formative assessment data to modify teaching and curricula so that all students are engaged in learning throughout the year. 4. We will use conferencing to discuss students’ academic needs and progress which will result in a set timeline to master academic goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will demonstrate improved delivery of CCLS-aligned English Language Arts instruction that meets the needs of all learners as evidenced by an increase in overall student progress for all accountability groups in Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments above the median percentile growth of 35%. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). SOP 3.5 All K-2 teachers September 2018– June 2019 Universal Literacy: Chancellor's Initiative Ensuring that every student is college and career ready and reading on grade-level by the end of 2nd grade, two dedicated reading coaches will support teachers in grades Kindergarten - 2 in reaching this goal. Universal Literacy (UL) Coaches will meet individually with selected teachers to observe literacy instruction and provide actionable feedback throughout the year with specific focus on incorporating the use of academic and content specific vocabulary in oral and written discourse, LASW and using this information to make immediate adjustments in teaching curricula. UL Coaches will meet with Assistant Principals and Principal throughout the year to monitor progress and plan next steps. This initiative will take place daily with identified teachers throughout the school year. SOP 3.2 and 3.5 All K-5 teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers in Kindergarten through fifth grades will continue to continue to work with coaches from Teaching Matters. The specific focus will be on developing instructional expertise with specific emphasis on selection and use of academic and content level vocabulary in oral and written discourse, use of higher order questioning stems, and modification of instruction and curricula based on student formative assessment data. Literacy resources purchased for this purpose art the Fountas & Pinnell (F&P) Literacy Intervention System and additional leveled reading resources. K-2 teachers will continue to use the Journeys Literacy Program as an Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Two reading coaches and classroom teachers are responsible for implementing literacy instruction. School administrators will oversee instruction with a specific focus on student demonstrated use of academic and content level vocabulary, and evidence of curricula modifications to engage all learners, Learning walks and cycles of observation including debriefs and next steps with classroom teachers will be conducted throughout the year. Classroom teachers are responsible for implementing literacy instruction. School administrators will oversee instruction by conducting and participate in learning walks and cycles of observations with a specific focus on vocabulary use and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  instructional resource. Third through fifth grade teachers will continue using ReadyGen, EngageNY and Junior Great Books as instructional resources for developing the literacy curriculum. Cycles of horizontal and vertical inter-visitations and feedback sessions will be conducted throughout the year to observe best practices with a specific focus on use of vocabulary in oral and written discourse, use of higher order questioning techniques, and using student formative assessment data to modify curricula and instruction in speaking, reading and writing.. Progress monitoring will take place using the Reading Behavior Tool, progress notes, exit slips, end of unit writing, and reading comprehension tasks. This initiative will take place throughout the school year during common planning time and Monday Professional Learning sessions for each identified grade throughout the school year. SOP 3.2 and 3.5 All K-5 teachers and students September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, with support from coaches and administrators, will implement and continue to adjust the ELA curriculum using the following resources: Common Core Learning Standards, NYC Literacy Scope and Sequence, NYC Scope and Sequence for Social Studies in Grades K-5, Engage NY literacy units of study, ReadyGen Literacy curriculum, Journeys literacy curriculum and Senderos bilingual literacy curriculum. Teachers planning together as a team with in-school coach and Teaching Matters Institute (TMI) coach support will develop "I Can" learning targets and develop daily formative classroom assessments to determine the degree of student mastery of the "I Can" learning targets. This activity will take place weekly with each grade level team leader. student engagement in appropriately scaffolded tasks based on student points of entry, as well as use of higher order questioning stems. Observations will include a debrief and next steps conversations with the teacher. Administrators will also conduct periodic data analysis using the Reading Behaviors Tool and summative assessment data. School administrators will also participate in grade-level inter-visitations to help support teachers in improving their practice and collaborating with each other. Classroom teachers and English as a Native Language (ENL) push-in teachers are responsible for implementing the program. School administrators will oversee instruction by conducting periodic data analysis at the beginning and end of each unit. Administrators will also oversee instruction with cycles of observation including debriefs and next steps with classroom teachers. Administrators will also conduct weekly 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  SOP 3.4 Social Studies, technology and visual arts cluster teachers will partner with classroom teachers within and across grades to create interdisciplinary social studies curricula that incorporate the arts, technology and other enrichment tasks. This activity will take place during Monday Professional Learning sessions once a month. SOP 3.2 We will employ five full-time and one F-Status teacher to provide small group instruction in reading using Fundations, Reading Recovery, and/or Wilson for students identified as "at -risk" in grades first through fifth grades. This activity will take place October through May. September 2018 - June 2019 Social Studies, visual arts and technology cluster teachers and all teachers in grades K-5 At-risk students in grades one through five October 2018 - May 2019 SOP 3.2 and 3.5 Vertical ENL teacher teams K-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 ENL push-in and self-contained teachers will support the school community efforts around use of academic and content level vocabulary, use of higher order questioning stems, and employing scaffolding techniques to engage all learners by providing resources, and conducting professional development for teachers and support staff. . meetings to support teachers with planning and data analysis. Social Studies, visual arts and technology Cluster Teachers and classroom teachers will be responsible for implementing the program. Administrators will oversee planning and instruction with cycles of observation including debriefs and next steps with all applicable teachers. Teachers will implement the program. School administrators will oversee the program by monitoring student progress using built in program assessment tools and conducting cycles of observations including next steps with all applicable teachers. ENL teacher team will be responsible for implementing the initiative. Administrators will oversee and monitor the program by conducting cycles of observations with a specific focus on student use of scaffolds to support, use and understanding of vocabulary, higher order questioning stems, and full engagement of all 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  3b – Parent and Family Engagement learners. Administrators will also support scheduling of PLs and attend them. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will engage and support families in their understanding and use of academic and content level vocabulary in oral and written discourse by hosting Tuesday afternoon family sessions by grade level on a monthly basis throughout the school year. Parents/guardians along with their children will participate in activities that explore use and understanding of academic and content level vocabulary. These activities will be designed in such a way that they may be also used at home to support students. All pedagogy and paraprofessionals as well as our Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors and administrators will be assigned strategically by grade to implement this program. Administrators will be responsible for oversight. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, teacher leaders, coaches, administrators, Teaching Matters Coaches will work together. Instructional Resources: Assessments in all instructional areas to monitor progress, curriculum resources both purchased and developed by teacher teams, technology including SMART Boards, desk top computers, laptops and Ipads, hard copy and digital library resources, professional learning sessions both on-site and off-site. Scheduling: School programmed for seven periods a day, weekly horizontal common planning, monthly vertical teacher team meetings, parent meetings, on-site and off-site professional learning sessions, inter-visitations and debriefings, teacher teams for inquiry. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, mid-point assessments in Fountas & Pinnell will show an overall increase of 5% in the number of students reading on grade level as compared with fall baseline F&P performance data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36 Fountas & Pinnell Reading Inventory will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? STRENGTHS 5.2 The school leader establishes overarchin2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  g systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. The school articulates and systematic5.3 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  ally promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40 environment for families, teachers, and students. This past year's goal of an increase in 10% for teacher responses to questions related to school safety on the Framework for Great School Survey was not met, however there was progress towards meeting this goal. 55% of teachers responded positively to questions about Classroom Behavior - up from 51% the previous year. 82% of teachers responded positively to questions about Safety/Personal Attention and Support- up from 75% the previous year. 83% of teachers responded positively to questions about Social-Emotional well-being -up from 76% the previous year. 60% of teachers responded that order and discipline are maintained at our school- up from 48% the previous year. 66% of teachers responded that they have influence over standards of behavior- up from 58% the previous year. 71% of teachers responded that School Safety Agents promote a safe and respectful environment at our school- up from 48%. Principal Performance Review/Measures of Leadership Practice 2017-2018 QR 1.4 Learning Environment Indicator- We received Well Developed. Feedback: The culture of PS 94 continues to grow as a professional learning community. You have energized and committed parents and have worked to build a safe and supportive learning environment for students. This is evidenced by the quiet and respectful environment that exists on each visit. You also created an environment of mutual trust amongst your staff by broadening the circle of teachers involved in decision making Positive Learning Collaborative Survey Analysis Results 2017 -2018 Areas of significant growth Comfort level with Using TCIS (Therapeutic Crisis Intervention Systems 85% of staff surveyed responded that they employ Active Listening Techniques 83% of staff surveyed responded that they -Allow Students Time and Space. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  81% of staff surveyed responded that they- Praise Positive Behavior. 94% of staff surveyed recognize that there is an active behavior support team at school that supports school-wide behavior systems. Quality Review 2016 - 2017 1.4 School Culture: We received well developed in all areas.  1.4 maintaining a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that support the academic and personal growth of students and adults.  3.4 Communication of high expectations to all stake holders and providing support to achieve those high expectations. Framework for Great School 2017-2018 Report 25% of teachers responding stated that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students. Supportive Environment Positive Learning Collaborative Survey Analysis Results 2017 -2018- Areas of significant growth  90% of staff agreed that they can maintain a positive relationship with students when they "push their buttons."  87% of staff agreed that they are able to manage challenging behavior effectively at least 75% of the time.  80+% of the staff are comfortable with the TCIS strategies of: Active Listening, Allowing students space and time, and praising positive behavior.  94% of the staff indicated that they are aware of the PBIS team that supports school-wide systems as well as aware of an RtI behavior support team.  77% of the staff surveyed indicated that many staff members encourage students to open up. Positive Learning Collaborative Survey Analysis Results 2017 - 2018 - Areas for Improvement  45% of the staff agreed that when disciplining students, adults at our school engage in power struggles less than 25% of the time.  55% of the staff agreed that they feel valued and listened to by their colleagues.  Less than 50% of the staff agreed that they feel comfortable conducting Community Circles, asking the four questions before intervening a dispute between students, and conducting a Life Space Interview (LSI)..  NEXT STEPS 5.5 The school leader and student suppor2018-19 SCEP-FF 42 t staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. . 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sens2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  e of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. OORS REPORTS  Level 4 incidents rose again for the 2017-2018 school year. There were 68 reported in 2016-2017 school year compared with 249 reported this past 2017-2018 school year. While our overall rate of major and minor behaviors has decreased this year, the severity of many of the major incidents reported have increased. These behaviors have significantly impacted the perception that behavior is a significant problem at our school. As a result, we are implementing the following programs. 1.We will continue to employ two teachers of school culture, one for the lower grades and one for the upper grades, for the purpose of proactively addressing off-baseline behavior consistently and teaching positive replacement behaviors. 2.Teachers of school culture will also work with the Lighthouse Team to ensure that every classroom has a cool-down area, all staff are versed in school wide use of cool-down techniques and actively work with students to use them throughout the day with students who struggle with remaining on baseline and do not consistently employ cool down strategies. 3.We will work closely with the School Implementation Team (SIT) to provide professional development for teachers in supporting student development of positive replacement behaviors and progress monitoring techniques for those students who have Behavior Intervention Plans and Individual Crisis Management Plans. 4.The SIT team will also develop professional learning workshops for special education teachers in crafting more effective Present Levels of Performance (PLOPs) statements – that clearly outline student’s current social emotional behaviors and the reasons why a student is not able to access the curriculum in a general education classroom. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  5. Lighthouse Team for Leader In Me. This initiative was started two years ago and has grown. This year the team will work more closely with each grade level teacher team to closely monitor and strategically implement additional positive support structures for students in need of additional role model support (community service initiatives, small group restorative circles). 6.Restorative Circles: All classroom teachers received professional development in running restorative circle last year. We will continue to use circles during the 2018-2019 school year in all classes. 7.. This year we will be partnering with Turnaround Schools for the purpose of learning and employing school wide and individualized plans to meet students' social emotional needs. . Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in positive teacher responses to questions related to classroom behavior on the NYC Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) SOP 5.2 and 5.4 We will partner with Turnaround for schools this year for the purpose of learning additional strategies/techniques to support positive social emotional development of our students. All stakeholders at P.S. 94x. Weekly October 2018 - June 2019 SOP 5.2 and 5.4 All stakeholders at P.S. 94x Weekly October 2018 - June 2019 We will continue to partner with the Franklin Covey Co. using the Social Emotional curriculum resources: The Leader in Me and The 7 Habits of Happy Kids to proactively teach and reinforce social-emotional skills. Lessons will take place weekly starting in October 2018. We will also participate in a school wide Covey professional development session on goal setting and action plan development to meet the goal. Staff will then roll this out to all students in the school. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 Students, teachers and staff in grades K - 5 Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Student planners with 7 Habits of Happy Kids support materials will be used in grades second through fifth to support development of executive function skills and social emotional development. Planners will be used daily. The Turnaround for Schools Team will be responsible for creating and implementing procedures and protocols for developing and monitoring social-emotional interventions. The Lighthouse Team Both teams will also be responsible for coordinating efforts and communicating with stakeholders consistently. Administrators will be responsible for overseeing implementation of the programs using systematic procedures to monitor academic and social emotional interventions. Teachers and staff will be responsible for overseeing the program. Administrators will be responsible for overseeing its implementation using observations, 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  SOP 5.2 and 5.4 Family Handbooks Spanish, English and Bengali will provide families with the Parent Involvement Policy, PBIS structures, School Compacts, Student Behavioral Contract, schedules, school policies for attendance, homework, lateness, Electronic Device Use, Technology Acceptable Use, school contacts, required school forms, etc. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 IDRA Coca Cola Youth Project – 30 fifth grade "at-risk" students will be identified to work with a teacher one period a week; four other periods a week, these students will mentor kindergarten students one-to-one in our Annex building. All families of students at P.S. 94x Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Selected students in fifth grade and kindergarten October 2018– June 2019 SOP 5.2 and 5.4 All students and staff at PS 94x August 2018- November 2019 Use School Compacts and School Culture systems and structures, incident forms, procedures and protocols based on prior year successes and feedback from staff and students. The Light House team will be responsible for revising and implementing procedures and protocols for developing and monitoring academic and social-emotional interventions. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 All staff and students September 2018- June 2019 Implementation of school wide behavior expectations, procedures and protocols throughout the year to new teachers, entire staff, small group targeted staff (paraprofessionals, school aides, grade level groups), students and parents. school community feedback. Teachers will distribute the Handbooks to parents during Meet & Greet meeting in September. Administration will oversee the process. Coca Cola Youth Project Coordinator, PS 94x school facilitator will implement the program. Administration will oversee the program utilizing periodic data analysis, review of progress reports and participation rates. Lighthouse Team, administration and guidance counselors will implement the initiative. Administration is also responsible for oversight through bi-weekly meetings, periodic data analysis, and student and staff surveys. School Culture teachers, administration and guidance counselors are responsible for implementation. Administration is responsible for oversight through periodic data 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  SOP 5.2 and 5.4 Assistant Principals, guidance and teachers of school culture will work directly with the lunch/recess staff to develop and consistently implement structures and routines aligned to the 7 Habits in the cafeteria and during recess to facilitate smooth transitions, safe play spaces, peaceful lunch conversations, and meditation techniques to resolve differences for the purpose of reducing the number of lunchtime referrals during the course of the school year. Lunch/Recess staff and all students in k - 5 grades. September 2018 - June 2019 SOP 5.2 and 5.4 Implementation of Check-in/Check-out Program (CICO). SWIS data and staff surveys will be used to identify Tier 2 and Tier 3 students in need of daily mentor support. Students will be matched with a mentor. A CICO Card will be used by the student's instructors and common areas staff to monitor their behavior throughout the day. At the end of the week, students will receive STARS tickets based on goals they have met. The CICO Card also goes home so that parents may review student progress and sign off on it. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 Bi-weekly SWIS team meetings to review SWIS incident reports and plan next steps based on student data indicating progress or lack of progress in reduction of minor or major student incidents. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 To support our Tier 3 students, Functional Behavior Assessments (FBAs), Behavior Intervention Plans (BIPs) and ICMPs will be developed based on SWIS data and ongoing progress monitoring of students with BIPs. Students identified based on SWIS data and teacher recommendation October 2018- June 2019 Students identified based on SWIS data reviewed every two weeks September 2018 - June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Students identified as needing structured support based on SWIS data analysis, learning walks, bi-weekly meetings. Assistant Principals, guidance, teachers of school culture are responsible for training lunch/recess staff. Lunch/recess staff are responsible for implementing the program. Administration is responsible for oversight through direct observations, and analysis of lunch/recess referrals. CICO Coordinators, CICO mentors will be responsible for implementing the program. SWIS team and administration will be responsible for overseeing the program through bi-weekly meetings and periodic data analysis. SWIS team will be responsible for reviewing SWIS data. Administration will oversee the initiative through bi-weekly meetings and periodic data analysis. Guidance counselors, School Assessment Team, and teachers will be responsible for implementing this initiative. Administration will be responsible for 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  SOP 5.2 and 5.4 Attendance Committee will oversee and provide intervention as well as incentive strategies for the purpose of raising our overall attendance rate from 60% for students with 90% and above attendance. Students will attendance below 90% September 2018- June 2019 SOP 5.2 and 5.4 All students in k - 5 grades September 2018 - June 2019 Restorative/Community Circles will continue to take place in all grades weekly throughout the school year beginning in September. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 Students in grades 4 - 5 October 2018- June 2019 Studios in School Residency project for students in grades four and five. This will take place weekly for all classes. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 Classes will take Title One funded enrichment trips for the purpose of broadening their knowledge base of world around them. Sop 5.2 and 5.4 Parents of participants in the IDRA Coca-Cola Project will be given program description when parental permission is sought. Periodic updates and student progress will be made available to participating families. All students in kindergarten through fifth grade October 2018 - June 2019 All parents of program participants October 2018 - June 2019 monitoring this initiative through periodic data analysis and monthly meetings. Attendance Committee, teachers, guidance counselors will be responsible for implementing the initiatives. Administrators will oversight. Classroom teachers will be responsible for implementing the program. Administrators will oversee and monitor activities through direct observation. Visual Arts Specialist will implement the program. Administrators will oversee and monitor activities through observation cycles and learning walks. Teachers will schedule the trips. Administrators will oversee the program Coca-Cola Youth Project Coordinator, PS94x school facilitator will implement the program. Administration will oversee the program using periodic data analysis, review of progress reports and participation rates. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 All staff members at PS94 September 2018- June 2019 SMHCP consultant will implement the program. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  School Mental Health Consultant Program (SMHCP) as part of ThriveNYC will provide a consultant to promote mental health in our community, assist in creating a Mental Health Work plan for our school, identify community resources and provide staff training and consultation in addressing mental health concerns of students. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 Select students in Grades K-5 September 2018-June 2019 We staff two SAVE Rooms (one in each building) to provide teachers and administrators with an alternative setting for students who are removed from classrooms/cafeterias/auditorium because of challenging behaviors. SAVE Room teachers will support students by assisting the student in identifying challenging behaviors and learning how to make better behavior choices. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 All students K - 5 and all staff September 2018-June 2019 Teachers of School Culture. This year we will continue to employ two teachers of school culture to plan and execute systems to drive positive student behavior and create an academic- focused culture of achievement. These teachers will provide support to school staff and develop effective techniques to maximize student learning through positive culture. They will serve as liaison to parents in communicating discipline issues/plans for improvement. SOP 5.2 and 5.4 We are implementing a school-wide initiative focused on providing more support and development of the social-emotional well-being of our students. We will continue to partner with the Franklin Covey Co. to use "The Leader in Me" whole-school transformation process The process involves teaching leadership and life skills to students to create a culture of student empowerment based on the idea that every child can be a leader. The year all staff will receive training in goal setting and development of action plans for the purpose of teaching students how to implement this process All staff members and students Kindergarten-5 September 2018 - June 2019. Administration will monitor and oversee the program through periodic data analysis and meetings. SAVE Room teachers will implement the program. Guidance and administration will monitor and oversee the program through periodic data analysis and meetings. Teachers of School Culture will be responsible for implementing the program. Guidance and administration will monitor and oversee the program through periodic data analysis and meetings. Teachers will implement the program. Administrators will oversee and monitor the activities through periodic data analysis, meetings and observation cycles. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  School Implementation Team (SIT) will work with special education teachers to provide workshops in crafting more effective Present Levels of student Performance statements in Individualized Education Programs (IEPs) so that the reasons a student is not able to access the curriculum in a general education class are clearly articulated. The SIT will also work with teachers on how to craft Behavior Intervention Plans (BIPs) and Individualized Crisis Managment Plans (ICMPs) that are student and staff reader friendly , with clear progress monitoring tools in use. Special Education teachers September 2018- June 2019. Special ed. teachers along with guidance counselors and related service providers will be responsible for crafting PLOPs, BIPs, and ICMPs along with progress monitoring. SIT will be responsible for implementing professional learning sessions to support teacher understanding and crafting of said documents. Administrators will be responsible for overseeing the program. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. All staff who have contact with families will be responsible for engaging families and increasing their understanding of a supportive environment in order to assist their children at home by teaching families about the 7 Habits when they attend conferences, publishing celebrations, Parent engagement Tuesday presentations, and whole school Boosters and assemblies. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers, teacher leaders, coaches, administrators, Turnaround for Schools Coaches, Studios in a School teaching artist, Community/Restorative Circles, support personnel from the Franklin Covey CBO for The 7 Habits- The Leader in Me, SMHCP consultant. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Instructional Resource: Professional development sessions provided by partnerships and school staff for academic and social – emotional policies and procedures, instructional resources and additional supports. Distribution and discussion of School Compacts to parents through Family Handbooks kindergarten through fifth grade. Distribution and daily use of Student Planners "7 Habits of Happy Kids" for Grades 2 - 5. Consistent acknowledgement of improved student academic and social behavior through the use of monthly recognition events, LEADER BUCKS, LEADER Tickets and coupons. Reading Challenge, Spelling Bee, Math Challenge, TIGER Day, MyOn Reading Club, & 7 Habits School Wide Events. Scheduling: School programmed for seven periods a day. Parent Engagement Tuesdays, Per-session time for curriculum planning, RtI and School Culture meetings and club advisories before and after school. Scheduling staff meetings in small group and whole group throughout the year to obtain staff feedback on observed successes and challenges of the Leader In Me program Scheduling of staff to run the school store, grant writing and shout outs for donations to stock the school store Partnership with Turnaround for Schools. Scheduling staff to conduct Parent Workshops on Parent Engagement Tuesdays Scheduling Leader In Me boosters with student talent and academic recognition Scheduling 100% Attendance trip Scheduling IDOL Show Scheduling Creativity Clubs and Student Service Advisories – student selected, teacher run Scheduling IDRA Coca Cola Project Scheduling CICO Mentor/Mentee Celebrations Scheduling SMHCP meetings Scheduling School Culture staff surveys Scheduling SAVE Room coverages. Scheduling meetings with school aides on a regular basis to trouble shoot areas/times during lunch and recess where students are struggling with remaining on baseline. Scheduling TCIS trainings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  X Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of February 2019, responses to the Lighthouse Team School Survey will show that more than 90% of teachers feel that the 7 Habits Program is having a positive impact on student social behavior. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Survey administered in February 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards x (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Principal's Performance Review/Measures of Leadership Practice 2017 - 2018 STRENGTHS:  SOP 4.4: QR Indicator 3.1- Goal Setting: In reflecting on goals and feedback, you have developed and monitored action plans for areas of focus with emphasis on improvements in Rigorous Instruction, Leadership Development and Supportive Environment. In conjunction with your administrative team, and by involving all stakeholders, including students and families, you are working collaboratively to guide the school with a clear purpose and a vision for coherence. 2018 -2019 End of Year Measures of Student Learning MATH (EOY MoSL) Assessment Results We did not meet our 2017-2018 goal of 30% students meeting or exceeding the grade level benchmark. Overall 15% met or exceeded the benchmark. GRADE FIVE Results based on class average of total points acquired. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  10X094: 3.1% Students Proficient (BOY 0% Proficient) District 10: 2.5% Students Proficient NYC DOE: 16.6% Students Proficient GRADE FOUR Results based on class average of total points acquired. 10X094: 4% Students Proficient (BOY 0.5% Proficient) District 10: 6% Students Proficient NYC DOE: 29.3% Students Proficient GRADE THREE Results based on class average of total points acquired. 10X094: 21.7% Students Proficient (BOY 0% Proficient) District 10: 20.6% Students Proficient NYC DOE: 43.9% Students Proficient GRADE TWO Results based on class average of total points acquired. 10X094: 13.8% Students Proficient (BOY 0% Proficient) District 10: 17.3% Students Proficient NYC DOE: 39.5% Students Proficient GRADE ONE Results based on class average of total points acquired. 10X094: 20.2% Students Proficient (BOY 0% Proficient) District 10: 26.2% Students Proficient 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  NYC DOE: 42.2% Students Proficient KINDERGARTEN Results based on class average of total points acquired. 10X094: 27.6% Students Proficient (BOY 0% Proficient) District 10: 27.8% Students Proficient NYC DOE: 42% Students Proficient new york state mathematics state test analysis MATHEMATICS PROGRESS BY STUDENTS IN GRADES THREE THROUGH FIVE AS MEASURED BY STUDENT PERFORMANCE ON THE NEW YORK STATE MATHEMATICS TEST GRADE THREE  OVERALL LEVEL 3 & 4 PERFORMANCE INCREASED FROM 13.6 TO 18.6  OVERALL LEVEL 1 PERFORMANCE INCREASED FROM 55.1 TO 59.8 Strengths: 3.G.2 Partition shapes into parts with equal areas. Express the area of each part as a unit fraction of the whole. For example, partition a shape into 4 parts with equal area, and describe the area of each part as 1/4 of the area of the shape. 3.MD.1 Tell and write time to the nearest minute and measure time intervals in minutes. Solve word problems involving addition and subtraction of time intervals in minutes, e.g., by representing the problem on a number line diagram. 3.OA.1 Interpret products of whole numbers, e.g., interpret 5 × 7 as the total number of objects in 5 groups of 7 objects each. For example, describe a context in which a total number of objects can be expressed as 5 × 7. 3.OA.5 Apply properties of operations as strategies to multiply and divide. Examples: If 6 × 4 = 24 is known, then 4 × 6 = 24 is also known. (Commutative property of multiplication.) 3 × 5 × 2 can be found by 3 × 5 = 15, then 15 × 2 = 30, or by 5 × 2 = 10, then 3 × 10 = 30. (Associative property of multiplication.) Knowing that 8 × 5 = 40 and 8 × 2 = 16, one can find 8 × 7 as 8 × (5 + 2) = (8 × 5) + (8 × 2) = 40 + 16 = 56. (Distributive property.) 3.OA.9 Identify arithmetic patterns (including patterns in the addition table or multiplication table), and explain them using properties of operations. For example, observe that 4 times a number is always even, and explain why 4 times a number can be decomposed into two equal addends. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  Weaknesses: 3.NF.3a Understand two fractions as equivalent (equal) if they are the same size, or the same point on a number line. 3.NF.3c Express whole numbers as fractions, and recognize fractions that are equivalent to whole numbers. Examples: Express 3 in the form 3 = 3/1; recognize that 6/1 = 6; locate 4/4 and 1 at the same point of a number line diagram. 3.NF.3d Compare two fractions with the same numerator or the same denominator by reasoning about their size. Recognize that comparisons are valid only when the two fractions refer to the same whole. Record the results of comparisons with the symbols >, =, or <, and justify the conclusions, e.g., by using a visual fraction model. 3.NF.2a Understand a fraction as a number on the number line; represent fractions on a number line diagram. 3.MD.7b Multiply side lengths to find areas of rectangles with whole-number side lengths in the context of solving real world and mathematical problems, and represent whole-number products as rectangular areas in mathematical reasoning. 3.MD.3 Draw a scaled picture graph and a scaled bar graph to represent a data set with several categories. Solve one- and two-step "how many more" and "how many less" problems using information presented in scaled bar graphs. For example, draw a bar graph in which each square in the bar graph might represent 5 pets. 3.MD.1 Tell and write time to the nearest minute and measure time intervals in minutes. Solve word problems involving addition and subtraction of time intervals in minutes, e.g., by representing the problem on a number line diagram. 3.OA.2 Interpret whole-number quotients of whole numbers, e.g., interpret 56 ÷ 8 as the number of objects in each share when 56 objects are partitioned equally into 8 shares, or as a number of shares when 56 objects are partitioned into equal shares of 8 objects each. For example, describe a context in which a number of shares or a number of groups can be expressed as 56 ÷ 8. Neutral Traits 3.MD.2 Measure and estimate liquid volumes and masses of objects using standard units of grams (g), kilograms (kg), and liters (l). Add, subtract, multiply, or divide to solve one-step word problems involving masses or volumes that are given in the same units, e.g., by using drawings (such as a beaker with a measurement scale) to represent the problem. 3.MD.5 Recognize area as an attribute of plane figures and understand concepts of area measurement. 3.MD.7c Use tiling to show in a concrete case that the area of a rectangle with whole-number side lengths a and b + c is the sum of a × b and a × c. Use area models to represent the distributive property in mathematical reasoning. 3.OA.8 Solve two-step word problems using the four operations. Represent these problems using equations with a letter standing for the unknown quantity. Assess the reasonableness of answers using mental computation and estimation strategies including rounding 3.OA.6 Understand division as an unknown-factor problem. For example, find 32 ÷ 8 by finding the number that makes 32 when multiplied by 8. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  3.OA.4 Determine the unknown whole number in a multiplication or division equation relating three whole numbers. For example, determine the unknown number that makes the equation true in each of the equations 8 × ? = 48, 5 = _ ÷ 3, 6 × 6 = ? 3.OA.3 Use multiplication and division within 100 to solve word problems in situations involving equal groups, arrays, and measurement quantities, e.g., by using drawings and equations with a symbol for the unknown number to represent the problem. GRADE FOUR  OVERALL LEVEL 3 & 4 PERFORMANCE DECREASED FROM 12.2 TO 8.1  OVERALL LEVEL 1 PERFORMANCE INCREASED FROM 53.6 TO 60.0 Strengths: 4.G.3 Recognize a line of symmetry for a two-dimensional figure as a line across the figure such that the figure can be folded along the line into matching parts. Identify line-symmetric figures and draw lines of symmetry. 4.NBT.6 Find whole-number quotients and remainders with up to four-digit dividends and one-digit divisors, using strategies based on place value, the properties of operations, and/or the relationship between multiplication and division. Illustrate and explain the calculation by using equations, rectangular arrays, and/or area models. 4.NF.3a Understand addition and subtraction of fractions as joining and separating parts referring to the same whole. 4.NF.3b Decompose a fraction into a sum of fractions with the same denominator in more than one way, recording each decomposition by an equation. Justify decompositions, e.g., by using a visual fraction model. Examples: 3/8 = 1/8 + 1/8 + 1/8 ; 3/8 = 1/8 + 2/8 ; 2 1/8 = 1 + 1 + 1/8 = 8/8 + 8/8 + 1/8. 4.NBT.2 Read and write multi-digit whole numbers using base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded form. Compare two multi-digit numbers based on meanings of the digits in each place, using >, =, and < symbols to record the results of comparisons. Weaknesses: 4.MD.5b Recognize angles as geometric shapes that are formed wherever two rays share a common endpoint, and understand concepts of angle measurement: An angle that turns through n one-degree angles is said to have an angle measure of n degrees 4.MD.7 Recognize angle measure as additive. When an angle is decomposed into non-overlapping parts, the angle measure of the whole is the sum of the angle measures of the parts. Solve addition and subtraction problems to find unknown angles on a diagram in real world and mathematical problems, e.g., by using an equation with a symbol for the unknown angle measure. 4.NBT.3 Use place value understanding to round multi-digit whole numbers to any place. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  4.G.1 Draw points, lines, line segments, rays, angles (right, acute, obtuse), and perpendicular and parallel lines. Identify these in two-dimensional figures. 4.MD.5b Recognize angles as geometric shapes that are formed wherever two rays share a common endpoint, and understand concepts of angle measurement: An angle that turns through n one-degree angles is said to have an angle measure of n degrees. 4.NBT.6 Find whole-number quotients and remainders with up to four-digit dividends and one-digit divisors, using strategies based on place value, the properties of operations, and/or the relationship between multiplication and division. Illustrate and explain the calculation by using equations, rectangular arrays, and/or area models. 3.OA.2 Interpret whole-number quotients of whole numbers, e.g., interpret 56 ÷ 8 as the number of objects in each share when 56 objects are partitioned equally into 8 shares, or as a number of shares when 56 objects are partitioned into equal shares of 8 objects each. For example, describe a context in which a number of shares or a number of groups can be expressed as 56 ÷ 8. Neutral Traits 4.G.2 Classify two-dimensional figures based on the presence or absence of parallel or perpendicular lines, or the presence or absence of angles of a specified size. Recognize right triangles as a category, and identify right triangles. 4.MD.4 Make a line plot to display a data set of measurements in fractions of a unit (1/2, 1/4, 1/8). Solve problems involving addition and subtraction of fractions by using information presented in line plots. For example, from a line plot find and interpret the difference in length between the longest and shortest specimens in an insect collection. 4.NBT.1 Recognize that in a multi-digit whole number, a digit in one place represents ten times what it represents in the place to its right. For example, recognize that 700 ÷ 70 = 10 by applying concepts of place value and division. 4.NBT.5 Multiply a whole number of up to four digits by a one-digit whole number, and multiply two two-digit numbers, using strategies based on place value and the properties of operations. Illustrate and explain the calculation by using equations, rectangular arrays, and/or area models. 4.NF.1 Explain why a fraction a/b is equivalent to a fraction (n × a)/(n × b) by using visual fraction models, with attention to how the number and size of the parts differ even though the two fractions themselves are the same size. Use this principle to recognize and generate equivalent fractions. 4.NF.2 Compare two fractions with different numerators and different denominators, e.g., by creating common denominators or numerators, or by comparing to a benchmark fraction such as 1/2. Recognize that comparisons are valid only when the two fractions refer to the same whole. Record the results of comparisons with symbols >, =, or <, and justify the conclusions, e.g., by using a visual fraction model. 4.NF.3d Solve word problems involving addition and subtraction of fractions referring to the same whole and having like denominators, e.g., by using visual fraction models and equations to represent the problem. Grade FIVE  OVERALL LEVEL 3 & 4 PERFORMANCE INCREASED FROM 12.6 TO 16 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60   OVERALL LEVEL 1 PERFORMANCE DECREASED FROM 67.5 TO 54.9 Strengths: 5.MD.5b Apply the formulas V = l × w × h and V = b × h for rectangular prisms to find volumes of right rectangular prisms with whole-number edge lengths in the context of solving real world and mathematical problems. 5.MD.5c Recognize volume as additive. Find volumes of solid figures composed of two non-overlapping right rectangular prisms by adding the volumes of the non-overlapping parts, applying this technique to solve real world problems. 5.NBT.7 Add, subtract, multiply, and divide decimals to hundredths, using concrete models or drawings and strategies based on place value, properties of operations, and/or the relationship between addition and subtraction; relate the strategy to a written method and explain the reasoning used. 5.NF.4b Find the area of a rectangle with fractional side lengths by tiling it with unit squares of the appropriate unit fraction side lengths, and show that the area is the same as would be found by multiplying the side lengths. Multiply fractional side lengths to find areas of rectangles, and represent fraction products as rectangular areas. 5.NF.7c Solve real world problems involving division of unit fractions by non-zero whole numbers and division of whole numbers by unit fractions, e.g., by using visual fraction models and equations to represent the problem. For example, how much chocolate will each person get if 3 people share 1/2 lb of chocolate equally? How many 1/3-cup servings are in 2 cups of raisins? 5.OA.2 Write simple expressions that record calculations with numbers, and interpret numerical expressions without evaluating them. For example, express the calculation "add 8 and 7, then multiply by 2" as 2 × (8 + 7). Recognize that 3 × (18932 + 921) is three times as large as 18932 + 921, without having to calculate the indicated sum or product. 5.MD.3b Recognize volume as an attribute of solid figures and understand concepts of volume measurement. A solid figure which can be packed without gaps or overlaps using n unit cubes is said to have a volume of n cubic units. 5.NBT.6 Find whole-number quotients of whole numbers with up to four-digit dividends and two-digit divisors, using strategies based on place value, the properties of operations, and/or the relationship between multiplication and division. Illustrate and explain the calculation by using equations, rectangular arrays, and/or area models. Weaknesses: 5.MD.2 Make a line plot to display a data set of measurements in fractions of a unit (1/2, 1/4, 1/8). Use operations on fractions for this grade to solve problems involving information presented in line plots. For example, given different measurements of liquid in identical beakers, find the amount of liquid each beaker would contain if the total amount in all the beakers were redistributed equally. 5.OA.1 Use parentheses, brackets, or braces in numerical expressions, and evaluate expressions with these symbols. 5.NBT.2 Explain patterns in the number of zeros of the product when multiplying a number by powers of 10, and explain patterns in the placement of the decimal point when a decimal is multiplied or divided by a power of 10. Use whole-number exponents to denote powers of 10. Neutral Traits 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  5.MD.1 Convert among different-sized standard measurement units within a given measurement system (e.g., convert 5 cm to 0.05 m), and use these conversions in solving multi-step, real world problems. 5.MD.4 Measure volumes by counting unit cubes, using cubic cm, cubic in, cubic ft, and improvised units. 5.MD.5a Find the volume of a right rectangular prism with whole-number side lengths by packing it with unit cubes, and show that the volume is the same as would be found by multiplying the edge lengths, equivalently by multiplying the height by the area of the base. Represent threefold whole-number products as volumes, e.g., to represent the associative property of multiplication. 5.NBT.1 Recognize that in a multi-digit number, a digit in one place represents 10 times as much as it represents in the place to its right and 1/10 of what it represents in the place to its left. 5.NBT.3a Read and write decimals to thousandths using base-ten numerals, number names, and expanded form, e.g., 347.392 = 3 × 100 + 4 × 10 + 7 × 1 + 3 × (1/10) + 9 × (1/100) + 2 × (1/1000). Instructional Next Steps: Math NEXT STEPS:  SOP4.3 Pedagogy- Developing: Continue to building a normed understanding of rigor and urgency at ensuring that effective practices are consistent across the school. Build upon your support of teachers with the learning walk process and inter-visitations you've begun to establish. While this is a great start, there remains a gap between the practices aligned with the Danielson's Framework for Teaching and what was observed in the classrooms visited. Differentiation was not visible for all groups. : Use the content expertise of your Assistant Principals and/or your ELL teachers for them to engage in co-teaching and modeling of effective access points and scaffolds for identified students. Likewise, they can also be used with all diverse learners. Convene a meeting with your teachers to deepen a coherent set of beliefs with all diverse learners. Convene a meeting with your teachers to deepen a coherent set of beliefs such as the way you started with getting them to deepen vocabulary by using the Frayer Model. Have teachers engage students with real world connections that support how students learn best based on their experience and practices. To have buy-in of everyone, create exercises, surveys, and work collaboratively to set a school-wide expectation. Once the beliefs are developed, they become shared and provide everyone with clear understanding of the expectations for student engagement and learning. Identify teacher leads for professional learning teams focused on higher order questioning. Ensure they establish Professional Learning Teams in the school and share their research-based findings. During our classroom observations, some students were not aware of the expectations and/or the purpose of the lesson. Next Steps: 1. We will work and plan collaboratively to consistently teach and use academic and content level vocabulary during all lessons and all areas of our school community, which will result in students increased understanding and accurate use of said vocabulary both orally and through written discourse. 2. We will work and plan collaboratively to develop and consistently use scaffolds to teach academic and content level vocabulary for students who are second language learners and/or below grade level speakers and writers, which will result in student use and understanding of content level vocabulary demonstrated by improved oral discourse and higher-level writing. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  3. We will work and plan collaboratively to create and consistently use higher order question structures such as Bloom’s Taxonomy, Hess and Webb’s Higher Order Questions during discussions sessions which will result in increased opportunities for students to use their academic and content level vocabulary in order to explain their thinking and advance their learning. 4. We will as school community teach and use engagement structures that hold our community accountable for using academic and content specific vocabulary during oral discourse and group discussions which will result instudent communication skills improving and deepening of their content knowledge. SOP 4.5 Assessment-Developing:: You have ensured that teachers are using and creating assessments and rubrics that are aligned to the curricula and providing actionable feedback to students and teachers. Continue to deepen teachers' skills in the use of formative assessment practices, as well as student self-assessment, so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet students' learning needs during daily classroom lessons. While teachers are learning about their students through discussions, reviewing student work and utilizing checklists and/or rubrics, checks for understanding during classroom visits were limited. Next Steps: We will work collaboratively to incorporate either oral or written vocabulary in checks for understanding which will result in students’ accurate use of academic and content level vocabulary leading to a higher percentage of students meeting the lesson target. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will collaborate to develop improved CCLS-aligned instructional approaches in Mathematics that meet the needs of all learners as evidenced by an increase of 12% scoring Level 3 or above using End-of-Year Math MOSL assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). SOP 4.3 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 K - 3 classroom teachers. math cluster Math Solutions- We will continue to partner with Math Solutions to implement number talks in K - 3 classrooms to build number sense and computational fluency. SOP 4.5 One math cluster position in grades kindergarten through third grade. The math cluster will plan horizontally with grade level teams. Math cluster will provide enrichment activities for on-level and exceeding grade level students as well as intervention strategies and activities for below average students. Math cluster will use researched based programs like Number Talks and EngageNY. September 2018 – June 2019 All students in kindergarten – second grade. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Math Solutions consultant will be responsible for modeling and providing professional learning activities to K - 3 teachers and math cluster. UFT Center Coach will be responsible for coordinating learning walks and 1:1 coaching sessions. K - 3 classroom and math clusters teachers will implement the activities, Supervisors will be responsible for supervising the activities. Math cluster teacher will be responsible for implementing this initiative. School administrators will oversee instruction by conducting periodic data analysis at the beginning and end of each unit. Administrators will also oversee instruction with cycles of observations 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  SOP 4.3 Administrators will use observation data to develop targeted professional learning experiences for teachers on all grades focusing on our Instructional Focus statements throughout the year. All teachers Sept. 2018 – June 2019 K - 5 SOP 4.5 All teachers K-5 September 2018- June 2019 Vertical and horizontal teacher teams focused on student performance in Math will facilitate refinement of math curriculum based on student progress, develop “I can” statement learning targets for lessons as well as Exit Tickets for each lesson to ensure horizontal and vertical alignment of curriculum. SOP 4.3 Students have access to several math websites that they will use during open access time in the library and at home. All students K-5 September 2018- June 2019 including debriefs and next steps with classroom teachers. Administrators will also conduct weekly meetings to support teachers with planning and data analysis. School administrators will be responsible for implementing the professional learning activities. Administrators will oversee instruction with cycles of observation including debriefs and next steps with classroom teachers. Administrators will also conduct periodic meetings to support teachers with planning and data analysis. Teacher teams will be responsible for implementing the activities. Administrators will oversee instruction with cycles of observations and learning walks including debriefs and next steps with classroom teachers. Administrators will also conduct periodic meetings to support teachers with planning and data analysis. Teachers are responsible for introducing, implementing and tracking the use of online activities and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  SOP 4.5 Horizontal teacher teams will use an inquiry based approach to analyze student performance in order to plan next steps. A LASW protocol will be taught to all teachers, and a LASW calendar will be used throughout the year to ensure teacher time is scheduled for this purpose. All teachers K-5 September 2018- June 2019 programs. Administrators will oversee use of math websites with cycles of observations and learning walks including debriefs and next steps with classroom teachers. Administrators and teachers will meet periodically to track effectiveness of the math websites using data analysis protocols. Lead teachers, coaches and administrators are responsible for implementing the activities. Administrators will oversee instruction with cycles of observation and learning walks including debriefs and next steps with classroom teachers. Administrators will also conduct periodic meetings to support teachers with planning and data analysis. S.O.P 4.3 and 4.5 Administrative team will participate in monthly learning walks to observe teacher practice and student learning based on the Instructional Focus Statements for the current school year for the purpose of providing teacher feedback based on their observed progress towards advancing their professional expertise in the Instructional Focus areas. All teachers K-5 September 2018- June 2019 Teachers will be responsible for implementing the program. Administrators will be responsible for scheduling and attending the learning walks. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  SOP 4.3 Parents/ Guardians September 2018 - June 2019 Title I Priority and Title III Parent Involvement funds will be used to provide math workshops. Parents have access to school website with list of math activities, supports and articles to help student learning. Parents also have access to current curriculum and topics for current math unit available on class webpage and school website. SOP 4.3 Students with Disabilities September 2018-June 2019 Grade level teachers plan horizontally to meet multiple entry points and scaffold tasks to meet student needs with a specific focus on expanding the oral and written use of academic vocabulary. SOP 4.3 and 4.5 K-5 ENL students September 2018 - June 2019 We will continue to provide self-contained ENL classes in kindergarten through third grade with certified ENL/Common Branch (ENL/CB) teachers to further support the academic and language needs of ENL learners throughout the school day. ENL students in fourth and fifth grade will be clustered based on language needs and will be provided with ENL block time instruction in their classrooms with a certified ENL teacher. ENL classroom and push-in/pull-out teachers participate in planning with grade level team members and provide strategies to help teachers meet the needs of ENL students. Parent Coordinator schedules, arranges and facilitates parent workshops. Administrator oversees teachers' utilization of class website and it's maintenance with current and relevant information related to units of study. School administrators, coaches and teacher leaders will be responsible for implementing the activities. Administrators will oversee instruction with cycles of observation and learning walks including debriefs and next steps with classroom teachers. Administrators will also conduct periodic meetings to support teachers with planning and data analysis. ENL Teachers are responsible for implementing the services. School administrators will oversee instruction by conducting periodic data analysis at the beginning and end of each unit. Administrators will also oversee instruction with cycles of observation including debriefs and next steps with 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  ENL teachers. Administrators will also conduct weekly meetings to support teachers with planning and data analysis. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During Tuesday Engagement Workshops, parents will be introduced to math activities on school website, class web pages and Mathletics which will give them information and structure to support their child's learning at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Teachers, teacher teams, administrative teams, School coaches, TMI coach, Parent Coordinator, Learning Leaders, Math clusters Instructional resources: Math programming resources, technology resources, SMARTboards, desk tops, laptops, ipads, websites with math programs, class web pages and professional learning resources from partnerships. Schedule Adjustments: Seven period day, grade level weekly professional learning time, on-site and off-site professional learning sessions, grade level and vertical planning/meeting time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teachers will collaborate to develop improved Next Generation aligned instructional approaches in mathematics that meet the needs of all learners as evidenced by an increase of 15% scoring Level 3 or above using Mid-Year Performance Task as compared to Beginning of Year baseline. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid-Year Performance Task in Math. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS Framework for Great Schools Report-2017-2018 We met our 2017-2018 goal. 59% of teachers responded to the School Survey, compared with 44% the previous 2016-2017 school year.- a 14% increase. Quality Review 2016 -2017: SOP 2.4 - Additional Finding - 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision- Rating: Proficient   Findings: Thoughtful rubric aligned observation and feedback systems support professional growth, including those new to the system. The principal is proactive in supporting teachers, providing feedback, as well as making informed and effective organizational decisions to support improvements in pedagogy. Impact: Thoughtful rubric aligned observation and feedback systems support professional growth and has elevated pedagogy and teacher reflection of their practice throughout the school. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  Principal Performance Review/ Measures of Leadership Practice 2016 - 2017    SOP 2.3 -1.3 Resource Allocation - Rating: Proficient SOP 2.4 - 4.1 Teacher Feedback - Rating: Proficient SOP 2.5 - 4.2 Teacher Teams - Rating: Proficient Framework for Great Schools Report 2016 -2017: SOP 2.3 -Effective School Leadership   Inclusive Leadership- 95% Instructional Leadership - 90% Principal Performance Review/ Measures of Leadership Practice 2016 - 2017  SOP 2.5 - 5.1 Monitoring and Revising: Continue to deepen teachers' skills in making adjustments in instructional practices as needed to increase the coherence of policies and practices across the school. Similarly, while teachers are keeping track of student data based on standards and skills, work is still needed in using data analysis findings to communicate specific examples of strengths, areas of need and clear next steps for adjustments for learners. Continue to collaborate with your instructional cabinet to build capacity in monitoring student data, assessing student learning and developing instructional plans to meet the needs of all learners in meeting the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards. Develop individual and group plans for students who need intervention as well as students who need to be challenged to ensure student progress and mastery. Closely monitor the implementation of strategies and skills taught and re-taught and impact of instructional revisions based on action planning. NEXT STEPS We will use conferencing to discuss students' academic needs and progress which will result in a set timeline to master academic goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the rate of response by Teachers to the NYC School Survey will increase by 10% as compared to 2017-2018response rate, adjusted for faculty census. Last year's Survey response rate was 59%. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). SOP 2.5 All K – 5 teachers Sept. 2018– June 2019 Teachers and support staff will be trained in using an on-line web-based application called "Datacation." The resources from this web-based resource will enable us to communicate student performance data to families and enable teachers and support staff to use student performance levels to create small groups for targeted instruction and analyze student data on a regular basis. SOP 2.5 All new teachers and mentors Sept. 2018- June 2019 All new teachers and their mentors are using the mentor text Great Habits, Great Readers by Paul Bambrick-Santoyo, Aja Settles, and Julianna Worrell. This professional text promotes the development of effective structures and routines needed to build a classroom community that fosters student independence, collaboration, and partnerships. Once the structures and routines are clearly in place, the book offers strategies for teaching all areas of the literacy block. SOP 2.5 Oct. 2018 – June 2019 TMI, ELA Coaches, administrators and teachers. Professional Partnership with Teaching Matters Institute (TMI) to provide additional coaching expertise for classroom teachers. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers and support staff will implement the activities with support from trainers; administrators will be responsible for overseeing and monitoring the activities. New teachers and their mentors will be responsible for using the resource and implementing the suggested strategies and routines. School administrators will provide feedback and next steps to new teachers and their mentors based on results from learning walks and observations and routines and structures implemented in the classroom. TMI Coaches are responsible for implementing the activities. Administration is responsible for overseeing and monitoring the activities. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  SOP 2.3 Horizontal planning team initiative with teachers designated to plan for each core area with a focus on developing long term tasks with differentiated entry points for each of the core instructional areas, with a specifc focus on academic vocabulary use - ELA, math, social studies and science. October 2018 - June 2019 Teachers self-select the core areas to plan for on each grade K - 5. SOP 2.3 ENL out of classroom teachers in the k - 5 band. October 2018 - June 2019 Vertical planning ENL team initiative. Classroom and out of classroom ENL teachers will work together to develop a bank of strategies to be shared with all grade levels that will support the multiple entry points of beginner level English Language Learners with a specific focus on vocabulary expansion and use in oral and written discourse. SOP 2.3 and 2.5 Talent Coach and administrators. September 2018 - June 2019 NYC DOE Talent Coach for Danielson Components Calibration will conduct norming activities with the administrative team during the year with the goal of ensuring the administrative team is normed adequately to conduct quality formal and informal observations. SOP 2.3 and 2.5 All teachers September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers will be provided with horizontal and vertical class inter-visitations to observe best practices related to our Instructional Focus Next Steps. SOP 2.3 and 2.5 UFT Teacher Center Coaches and All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 UFT Teacher Center Coaches provide on-site professional learning using modeling, inter-class visitations, Math and ELA planning and Classroom teachers will be responsible for developing tasks with differentiated entry points and sharing the work with their grade level colleagues. Administration is responsible for overseeing and monitoring the activities. ENL classroom and out of classroom teachers will be responsible for developing bank of strategies and sharing them with all teachers. Administration is responsible for overseeing and monitoring the activities. NYC DOE Talent Coach and administrators will implement and oversee activities. Lead teachers, coaches and administrators are responsible for implementing the activities. Administration is responsible for overseeing and monitoring the activities. UFT Teacher Center Coaches and teachers will be responsible for implementing the activities. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  professional learning opportunities on and off-site as well as professional development resources. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration is responsible for overseeing and monitoring the activities. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Communication between teachers and families about student progress will be improved through the "Datacation/Pupilpath" platform throughout the school year. In addition, Parent Engagement Tuesdays will be used to conduct workshops to promote greater parent understanding of the importance of home support. The Kindergarten-Grade 2 family sessions will take place on October 17th, November 14th, December 12th, January 16th, February 13th, March 13th, April 17th and May 15th. The Grades 3-5 family sessions will take place on October 24th, November 21st, December 19th, January 23rd, February 27th, March 20th, April 24th and May 22nd. Administrators will be responsible for oversight. Our school will regularly host Classroom Publishing Celebrations to showcase student progress to their peers and families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources needed: Teachers, administrators, internal and external coaches. Instructional resources needed: Development and implementation of teacher professional learning surveys in order to ascertain teacher needs around 3b, and 3c so that differentiated Professional Learning sessions may be provided. Identification of teachers who are consistently rated Effective or higher in 3b and 3c in order to set up inter-visitations, horizontally and vertically. Identification of outside resources that support development and implementation of structures and strategies that foster student engagement and higher order thinking. EngageNY resources. Scheduling : Seven period day, inter-visitations, observations and debriefings, professional learning sessions both on and off-site. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  By February 2019, responses to Lighthouse Team School Survey will show that more than 85% of teachers feel that the 7 Habits Program is having a positive impact on student academic behavior. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Leader In Me Staff Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. STRENGTHS We met our CEP goal - Strong Family Ties- Survey Elements score increased from 2.25 during the 2016-2017 school year to 3.27 for the 2017-2018 school year. SOP 6.2: Inclusive Leadership- Overall ratings and sub-categories all remained strong-95%   Outreach to Parents- Overall rating increased from 93% during the 2016-2017 school year to 96% for the 2017-2018 school year.  Parent Involvement in School- Overall rating increased from 84% during the 2016-2017 school year to 86% for the 2017-2018 school year.  Parent-Principal Trust- Overall rating increased from 94% during the 2016-2017 school year to 96% for the 2017-2018 school year.  Parent - Teacher Trust- Overall rating increased from 95% during the 2016-2017 school year to 97% for the 2017-2018 school year.  Teacher-Principal Trust-Overall rating increased from 79% during the 2016-2017 school year to 88% for the 2017-2018 school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76   Teacher - Teacher Trust- Overall rating increased from 82% during the 2016-2017 school year to 85% for the 2017-2018 school year. o  Outreach to Parents - 93%  Parent Involvement in School - 84%  Parent-Teacher Trust - 95%  Parent- Principal Trust - 94%  Teacher -Principal Trust - 79%  Teacher- Teacher Trust - 82% Feedback from Principal Practice Observation 2017-2018 Aligned to QR 1.4- The culture of PS 94 continues to grow as a professional learning community. You have energized and committed parents and have worked to build a safe and supportive learning environment for students. This is evidenced by the quiet and respectful environment that exists on each visit. NEXT STEPS Framework for Great Schools  Strong Family-Community Ties o Parent Involvement - Opportunities to volunteer at school only increased slightly from 57% responding they have had opportunities during the 2016-2017 school year to 58% for the 2017-2018 school year. Feedback from Principal Practice Observation 2017-2018 In your inclusive approach, continue to strategize with your support staff and classroom teachers on how to better assist families and motivate students who are chronically absent. According to the School Performance Dashboard, only 66% of your students are listed as having 90+ attendance. NEXT STEPS 1. We will consistently monitor and address student lateness and absenteeism for the purpose of improving attendance and indentifying the root causes of absenteeism and lateness. 2. The attendance team will continue to plan and implement attendance recognition activities throughout the school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 4% increase in the rate of positive responses by parents/guardians to the Parent Involvement category on annual NYC School Survey. This past year's response ('17-'18) was 86%. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 77  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) SOP 6.5 Teachers and support staff October 2018 – June 2019 The Attendance Committee will work with the school community to support student attendance efforts. All teachers will develop and maintain attendance sheets/phone/email logs for all parent communication that takes place during the school year. SOP 6.4 and 6.5 Parents and guardians Sept.-2018- June 2019 Title I Priority and Title III Parent Involvement funds will be used to implement family engagement activities after school and on the weekends. Robin Hood library will conduct parent workshops, The parent coordinator will conduct Cook Shop workshops. Families in the kindergarten band will participated in the Cool Culture Pass program, that provides free admission to dozens of cultural institutions in NYC, during out of school time. Teachers will conduct weekly conferences with small groups of parents to address the needs of students with similar learning styles based on the Next Generation Standards. The school's website, ps94x.org, provides information for parents to participate in students' learning on the class website and "For Parents" section. Attendance Committee will develop and implement attendance recognition events as well as efforts to resolve students who have below 90% attendance rates. Teachers will initiate and maintain contact with parents and guardians. Teachers and support staff will implement the activities. Administration will oversee and monitor this initiative. Teachers will initiate and maintain contact with parents and guardians. Teachers and , guidance will develop and implement family Engagement events after school and on Saturdays. Parent Coordinator facilitates monthly parent workshops as well facilitate family registration for the Cool Culture Pass. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 78  Robin Hood Library teacher will work with the Parent Coordinator to run Library workshops. Technology Tech Support teacher will maintain school website. Administrators will oversee the communication between parents and staff by conducting and participating in periodic meetings with staff and attending parent communication workshops. Teachers, guidance counselors and administrators will implement these parent meetings. Administration will oversee and monitor this initiative during weekly common planning meetings and monthly SAT meetings. Teachers in grades kindergarten through second grade will work with the Universal Literacy Coaches to implement engagement activities. Administrators will oversee the program and implementation. Parent Coordinator, staff and CBO's will conduct the workshops. Administrators will oversee the SOP 6.5 Parents and guardians October 2018 - June 2019 Teachers, guidance counselors and administrators will meet with parents Tuesday afternoons to share data on individual student progress and their needs. Information about appropriate support services for students will be communicated to families. SOP 6.4 Families in grades K - 2 November 2018 - March 2019 Teachers in grades kindergarten through second will work with Universal Literacy Coaches to develop and implement a series of family engagement events after school on Tuesdays. SOP 6.4 All parents/guardians in the school community September 2018-June-2019 Parent workshops will be conducted to support development of parenting skills, understanding of special education services, and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 79  Next Generation Standards to support student academic success. SOP 6.5 Parent/guardian members of the SLT and school personnel September 2018 - June 2019 School Leadership Team (SLT) will meet on a monthly basis to discuss and document progress towards meeting CEP goals. Discussion of items of school importance and impact are encouraged from all constituents. SOP 6.4 ELL/SWD Arts Engagement Grant with Arts Horizons January 2019 - May 2019 Seven classes in the third through fifth grade band that contain students who are ELLs/SWD status. SOP 6.5 Fifth Grade family workshops will be conducted to inform students and their families about the application process for Middle School. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Grade 5 students and families October 2018 - May 2019 program implementation by conducting weekly meetings to support planning, data analysis and review attendance rates. SLT members will participate in meetings. School Principal will oversee and attend meetings, create agendas, track attendance, publicize minutes and provide informational feedback. Dance residency staff will be responsible for implementing the program. Classroom teachers will be responsible for monitoring progress. Administration will be responsible for programming and oversight. Guidance Counselor will conduct workshops. Administrators will oversee the program and implementation. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Robin Hood Library Grant, Cookshop, MMCC, Cool Culture Pass, ELL/SWD Arts Engagement Grant, Family engagement activities after-school and on Saturdays. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FF 80  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources needed: Principal, parent/guardian members of the SLT, staff members of the SLT, Parent Coordinator,administrators, teachers, coaches, Guidance counselors, Learning Leaders, CBOs Instructional resources: Curriculum overviews, meeting space, translation services, communication plans, parent involvement strategies, teacher per diem, teacher per session, supervisor per session Scheduling resources: Meeting schedules and locations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 20% Increase in the number of students/families registered for NYC Student Account, as compared to February 2018, adjusted for student enrollment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Pupil Path registration link. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 81  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Reading Recovery Program is taught one-to-one to first graders in half-hour sessions, five days per week during regular school day for 20-week sessions. Second to fifth grade has designated 1 period everyday for 50 minutes to deliverAISinstruction to a group of 4-6 students based on instructional need. Reading and Writing strategies are taught one-to-one and in small group tutoring sessions in a six-month after-school program for students in second to fifth grade. Select first grade students meet every day with Reading Recovery teacher during the school day for 30 minutes in a one on one session. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Wilson Language Program is taught in small groups to students in Third through Fifth grade. Sidewalks reading program is taught in small groups to students in Third through Fifth grade. Fundations is taught whole-group during the school day to Kindergarten students. It is also taught in small groups to students in Kindergarten through Second Grade. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) To determine students need for AISservices in Fundations, Guided Reading, Reading Recovery, Sidewalks, After School participation, and ReadyGen grouping, teachers use student's initial Fountas& Pinnell(F&P) benchmark scores, Expanded Learning Time (Title I) Word Identification and Spelling Test (WIST)is used to determine students phonemic and decoding skills to create Wilson groupings of students. Journeys reading program is used to teach reading and writingwhole-group during the school day to students in Kindergarten, first, and second grade. Guided Literacy methodology using graphic organizer, spelling support structures and structured paper types is taught during regular school day to students in K-5. A blended literacy program using resources from ReadyGen, Engage Fundations is taught whole group and in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 82  Mathematics Performance on quick checks, summary assessments and performance tasks. NY, Social Studies and Science resources is used to teach reading and writing in third, fourth and fifth grades. Guided Literacy Methodology using leveled text resources is taught in small groups during regular school day to students in Kindergarten through Fifth Grade. Reading Recovery is a school-based short-term intervention designed for first grade students who are the lowest-achieving levels in literacy after their first year of school. Math reinforcement activities and games are used in small groups of students in Kindergarten through fifth Grades during regular school day. Math strategies are taught in small group tutoring sessions in a six-month After-school program for students in second to fifth Grades . Science Demonstrated need based on teacher observation of student performance Amplify Science will be used one-to-one and in small group instruction during science program Small group instruction and 1:1instruction 2018-19 SCEP-FF 83 small groups every day in classroom. Journeys and ReadyGentaught everyday in classroom in whole group and small flexible groupings. Wilson Sidewalks Small group instruction and one-to-oneinstruction. Small group instruction takes place during the group work time part of the math instructional block. Small group math instruction takes place after school during Title I and Title III after schoolProgram In grades K-5, students receive Science instruction 2 days per week for 50 minuteswith implementation during regular school day for students in Kindergarten through Fifth Grades. NYS Social Studies Scope and Sequence is used to develop and implement the K - 5 Social Studies curriculum. Small group and one to one instruction takes place during the school day for students Kindergarten - Fifth grades Small groupand one-to-one counseling sessions Small group instruction and 1:1instruction verticalRTIplanning teams designing instruction for multiple entry points. In grades K-5, students receive Social Studies instruction 2 days per week for 50 minuteswith verticalRTIplanning teams designing instruction for multiple entry points. Small group and one-to-one sessions During the school day Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) and understanding of concepts. Demonstrated need based on teacher observation of student performance and understanding of concepts. At-risk small group guidance sessions are provided for students demonstrating need based onSWIS reportanalysis, teacher or parent request based on observed behaviors that may not be reportable inSWIS(i.e., significant negative life event, depression). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 84  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 130 students in temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide students with school supplies and enrichment events. Additionally our Parent Coordinator works with families to provide resources available for permanent housing, food resources, mental health resources, as applicable. We work with families to provide after school care in our MMCC wraparound program as well as day camp. These families are given priority admission. We support STH by offering guidance counseling services to promote improved mental health and self-esteem. STH participate in "The Leader in Me" program and attend student recognition and talent assemblies. Wilson Language instruction and Just Words instruction are used to increase vocabulary and literacy skills in grades three through five. We also sponsor Grade Five Senior Activities dues for STH. For all grades, we provide funds as applicable for class trips and any other class enrichment events. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 85  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 86  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. P.S. 94x works with the schools we partner with for student teachers to attract, select and interview highly qualified teachers, and develop a bank of questions to use during interviews. School open houses and tours are conducted by administrative staff for prospective candidates. Administrative staff attend teacher recruitment fairs organized by Teacher Recruitment office. New teachers are mentored by experienced teachers in our school. In addition to this, grade level common planning takes place every week for every grade. The meeting is facilitated by the teacher leaders, an administrator, or coach. Teachers share best practices at meetings, through horizontal and vertical walks, inter-class visitations, peer observations and debriefings. School wide staff meetings are held to solicit teacher feedback for establishment of classroom expectations and the reinforcement of behavioral expectations in common areas. Teachers also attend professional development off-site during the summer and school year . 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach (TDEC) will work with school administrators during the school year to continue calibration of rating low inference notes and developing feedback. As applicable, teachers will attend:  ENL Professional development series offered by the Office of English Language Learners.  United Federation of Teachers Teacher Center Partnership.  TMI Leadership Institutes for teachers of English Language Arts (ELA), Math, English Language Learners (ENLs), Special Education.. Special Education and ENL professional development series offered by the NYC DOE.   Teaching Matters Institute Specialists work with teacher teams in house to continue to strengthen the Math and ELA curriculum using the Go Math! , ReadyGen, Junior Great Books, Journeys/Senderos (grades K -2), NYC Scope and Sequence for Social Studies and other Next Generations Standards based aligned resources.  TCI workshops will be provided to continue to implement PBIS with fidelity and provide in school support. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 87   Teacher Team Meetings and classroom inter-visitations both horizontal and vertical, to share and observe  best practices. Studios in a School partnership provides professional development for participating teachers in the upper grades  The 7 Habits of Happy Kids/The Leader In Me - Social Emotional Curriculum PL support  Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) three day workshop will be offered at the beginning of the school year to all new teachers and teachers of ENLs and SWD's to continue to provide research based strategies for scaffolding grade level content material for students performing below grade level.  Math Solutions professional learning sessions designed to increase engagement in math for all students.  Universal Literacy Coach 1:1 support for new teachers and experienced teachers who need additional support in developing targeted guided literacy work stations and small group instruction.  Wilson Language Training professional learning.  Turnaround for Schools professional learning for social emotional development. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Open House sessions will be conducted in the spring for all families who have enrolled in Kindergarten for the 2018– 2019 school year. Open House activities will include classroom observation of instruction, teacher presentations of Kindergarten curriculum and its alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards, overview of Parent Involvement activities conducted during the 2017-2018 school year, and activities with resources for families to use to support their child’s academic and social emotional development at home. During the first week of September, prior to school opening, incoming kindergarten students will attend half-day sessions with their classroom teachers to become acquainted with the school climate and culture. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 88  School wide student assessments used this year are aligned to the Next Generation Standards for literacy (ReadyGen, Junior Great Books and Journeys), and math ( to be used as resources to develop the curriculum: Go Math!, Number Talks, Math workshop model, Engage NY, and Next Generation aligned performance tasks). These assessments include pre- and post-tests, and quick checks for understanding and performance tasks. Teacher teams, created based on teacher survey results, will work collaboratively to decide which assessments and quick checks to administer based on student assessment results. Kindergarten through fifth grade students will also participate in the NYCDOE Math MOSL Baseline and End-line Performance Task Assessments. The Fountas and Pinnell Literacy Assessment will be administered to all students in grades Kindergarten through fifth to monitor student progress three times per year. Use of Journeys Literacy Program for kindergarten through second grade will continue. Teacher teams will use a "Looking at Student Work" protocol to assess student strengths and weaknesses and decide actionable next instructional steps based on those student needs. UFT, TMI and Universal Literacy coaches will support this process. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 1,227,110 16,979 x x Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, part 4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D, part 4b 5E, part 4b Section 8 5A, part 4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 2018-19 SCEP-FF 89  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 183,129 100,625 44,750 16,955 x x x x 5D, part 4b 5E, part 4b 5A, part 4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D, part 4b 5E, part 4b Section 6 5A, part 4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D, part 4b 5E, part 4b Section 6 5A, part 4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D, part 4b 5E, part 4b Section 6 5A, part4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D, part 4b 5E, part 4b 2018-19 SCEP-FF 90 7,986,969 x Tax Levy (FSF) Local 5A, part 4b 5B, part 4b 5C, part 4b 5D, part 4b 5E, part 4b Section 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 91   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 92  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy PARENT INVOLVEMENT POLICY 2017-2018 General Expectations P.S. 94x – Kings College School agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: ❖P.S. 94x will put into operation programs, activities, and procedures for the involvement of parents consistent with Section1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). The programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children. ❖P.S.94x will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of Section1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school community compact consistent with Section1118(d) of the ESSA. ❖P.S. 94x will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan. ❖ In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, we will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities and parents of migratory children, including alternative formats, upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand. ❖P.S. 94x will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs and decisions about how the 1% of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 93  ❖P.S. 94x will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: As defined in Section 9101(32) of the ESSA, the term parental involvement” means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring 1. that parents/guardians play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; 2. that parents/guardians are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; 3. that parents/guardians are full partners in their child's education and are included, as appropriate, in decision making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; 4. the carrying out of other activities, as described in Section 1118. Description of How P.S. 94x – Kings College School will Implement Required Parent Involvement Policy Component 1.P.S. 94x will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under Section 1112 of the ESSA: The Parent Association Executive Board will meet with the Principal once a month. The needs of the parents are assessed by survey each year. An Overview Curriculum Guide is sent out every month to update parents on the focus of each curriculum area of instruction. A monthly calendar is sent out to inform parents of assemblies, parent meetings, etc. and posted on our website. Class trips are posted on the school website calendar. Parent workshop offerings are sent out regularly to parents. The School Community Bulletin Board is also used to publicize events in multiple languages. There is also a school Website that translates into Spanish and Bengali when parents select the language. A Parent Messenger phone system is also used to notify parents of significant events and their child’s attendance. The service is provided in English and Spanish. 2.P.S. 94x will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: The P.S. 94x Parent Association Executive Board is a part of the School Leadership Team. Parents are notified by letter and at an annual meeting of school academic standing according to the New York State Department of Education. 3.P.S. 94x will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: The Parent Association works with the administration and the Parent Coordinator to offer support and assistance in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities. Parent Coordinator maintains a regular dialogue with parents to publicize school events, address parent concerns and serve as a liaison between the school and the parents. School Assessment Team, School Counselors, teachers, Parent Coordinator and administrators work with 2018-19 SCEP-FF 94  parents and students to plan for student improvement through Child Study Meetings, Individual Education Plans [IEPs], Parent-Teacher meetings, and Parent-Teacher Conferences. 4.P.S. 94x will coordinate and integrate Title I parental involvement strategies through the following programs: ● Parent Workshops ● Robin Hood Library Open Access ● Parent Volunteers Program ● Cookshop for Families Workshop Series ● Family Workshops/Events ● Faculty-led Workshops We engage parents in the following ways:   Family Center run by our Parent Coordinator: Supports families in our school community by providing translation services, introductions to key staff members at the school, and contacts to agencies and support services at school and in the community.  Plans and runs workshops based on parent survey selections  Organizes parent volunteers to support various school events.    Parent Association: Runs quarterly meetings. Topics include curriculum, testing, planning, special events for Serves as a hub for families to meet informally before, during and after school. School Leadership Team: our parents are active partners on the SLT. families. 5.P.S. 94x will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents/guardians, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial minority background). P.S. 94x will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. P.S. 94x will conduct a parent survey each year. The results are used to revise and plan parent involvement activities for the coming year. The results will be communicated to parents during their quarterly parent meetings. 6.P.S. 94x will build the school’s and parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 95  a.P.S. 94x will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following: i. State’s academic content standards. ii. State’s student academic achievement standards. iii.State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators. b. P.S. 94x will provide materials and workshops to help parents/guardians work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by: Offering workshops on parent selected topics throughout the year as well as informational meetings regarding curriculum (Meet & Greet; Open School Weeks), articulation (Grade 4 and Grade 5 Parent Meetings) and preschool entry (Kindergarten Open House). Maintaining a variety of on-line programs which can be accessed from home are listed on our school website. The school library maintains Open Access hours for parents every day. A monthly calendar along with follow-up flyers is regularly distributed to inform parents of upcoming events and school activities. A school website provides a wealth of information for parents and students to use. c. P.S. 94x will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil personnel services, principal and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools: Parents are informed of school activities via the school website, monthly school wide calendars, follow-up flyers, School Messenger Service, parent letters and alerts from the administration and from the teachers. d. P.S. 94x will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate an integrate parental involvement programs and activities with Head Start, Reading First, Early Reading First, Even Start, Home 2018-19 SCEP-FF 96  Instruction Programs for Preschool Youngsters, the Parents as Teachers Program, and public preschool and other programs and Conduct other activities, such as parent resource centers, that encourage and support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children by: P.S. 94x collaborates with the Mosholu Montefiore Community Center which runs a community preschool program. In June, the school hosts Open Houses for in-coming kindergarten children and their families. The Open Houses provide an opportunity for the preschool families to meet with our school community. e. P.S. 94x will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand. Parent notices are backpacked. Notices are posted at main door entrances and School Community Bulletin boards. Translations of information in other languages are made by school staff, NYC Translation Unit, “Google Translate” and outside contracted agencies. Parents are contacted by phone as the need arises. The school website and school messenger are also utilized. 7. Community Engagement Partnerships: IDRA Coca Cola  P.S. 94x Parent Association  OST Programs – Mosholu Montefiore Community Center - All Grades  ● After School Program  ● Summer Away Day Camp- Summer of 2018 K - 5  P.S. 94x Learning Leaders Parents Group   Box Tops for Education Fundraising Food Bank of the City of New York   Health First  Ridgewood Savings Bank (Grades 1, 2 and 3)   Guidance Interns Student Teachers  First Book.org   NYPL Mosholu Branch  Arts Horizons Lehman College Art Gallery 2018-19 SCEP-FF 97 Lehman College Art Gallery Project Studios In a School   Boy Scouts   Mathletics  MyOn Reading  Turnaround For Children Grants:  Robin Hood Library Grant: ▪ Provides instruction and resources aligned to the school curriculum ▪ Provides Open Access hours for students and their families before and after school, ongoing purchase of resources aligned to DOE and State instructional initiatives ▪ Yearlong Reading Challenge Competition - Grades 2 – 5 ▪ Second Grade Reading Challenge and Tiger Day Event ▪ Book Fairs ▪ Parent Workshops  Council Grants from Councilman Andrew Cohen Technology Grant  Council for the Arts Grant creating literacy based murals for the Annex walls  Donors Choose Grants for teacher projects- more than 50 teachers funded to date  Library Parents as Partners Grant – Spring 2017 at the Annex for our Kindergarten and First Grade families The following Enrichment Programs take place all school year and are activities provided to our students.  Student Council Grades 4 - 5 Governed by student voted peers Supports Community Service Initiatives Fifth Grade students assist with planning Fifth Grade Spirit Week  Cool Culture Pass - K  Cook Shop Classroom – K and 1   MyOn Reading – Home & School Web-based Literacy Program  Mathletics Studios in a School – Grades 4 and 5 2018-19 SCEP-FF 98  A-Z Learning The following Enrichment Activities take place over a series of weeks during the school year and are activities provided to our students. Spelling Bee Competition- Grades 4 and 5 Spring Talent Show (IDOL) Literacy Academic Intervention Programs: Wilson, Just Words, Reading Recovery  Robin Hood Second Grade Reading Challenge and TIGER Day Celebration (involves parents as well)  Robin Hood Yearlong Reading Challenge - Grades 2 – 5   Math Fact Competition- Grades 2 – 5  Book Fairs – Fall, Winter and Spring K - 5  Rockin' Readers - Spring Grades K-5    GO Math small groups  Parent Workshops  Monthly Calendar Activities  At-risk student counseling groups  Class LEADER BUCKS – Whole-Class Acknowledgement System   CICO (Check In-Check Out) Club CICO Card Program Student LEADER TICKETS – Individual Student Acknowledgement System The School Parent Involvement Policy was developed jointly with, and agreed upon by parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs. The Policy is distributed yearly to all parents at Parent-Teacher Conferences and is posted on the school website. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 99  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ❖In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, we will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities and parents of migratory children, including alternative formats, upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand. ❖P.S. 94x will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs and decisions about how the 1% of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. ❖P.S. 94x will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 100  As defined in Section 9101(32) of the ESSA, the term parental involvement” means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring 1. that parents/guardians play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; 2. that parents/guardians are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; 3. that parents/guardians are full partners in their child's education and are included, as appropriate, in decision making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; 4. the carrying out of other activities, as described in Section 1118. 1.P.S. 94x will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under Section 1112 of the ESSA: The Parent Association Executive Board will meet with the Principal once a month. The needs of the parents are assessed by survey each year. An Overview Curriculum Guide is sent out every month to update parents on the focus of each curriculum area of instruction. A monthly calendar is sent out to inform parents of assemblies, parent meetings, etc. and posted on our website. Class trips are posted on the school website calendar. Parent workshop offerings are sent out regularly to parents. The School Community Bulletin Board is also used to publicize events in multiple languages. There is also a school Website that translates into Spanish and Bengali when parents select the language. A Parent Messenger phone system is also used to notify parents of significant events and their child’s attendance. The service is provided in English and Spanish. 2.P.S. 94x will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: The P.S. 94x Parent Association Executive Board is a part of the School Leadership Team. Parents are notified by letter and at an annual meeting of school academic standing according to the New York State Department of Education. 3.P.S. 94x will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: The Parent Association works with the administration and the Parent Coordinator to offer support and assistance in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities. Parent Coordinator maintains a regular dialogue with parents to publicize school events, address parent concerns and serve as a liaison between the school and the parents. School Assessment Team, School Counselors, teachers, Parent Coordinator and administrators work with parents and students to plan for student improvement through Child Study Meetings, Individual Education Plans [IEPs], Parent-Teacher meetings, and Parent-Teacher Conferences. 4.P.S. 94x will coordinate and integrate Title I parental involvement strategies through the following programs: ●Parent Workshops ●Robin Hood Library Open Access ●Parent Volunteers Program 2018-19 SCEP-FF 101  ●Cookshop for Families Workshop Series ●Family Workshops/Events ●Faculty-led Workshops We engage parents in the following ways:  Family Center run by our Parent Coordinator: -Supports families in our school community by providing translation services, introductions to key staff members at the school, and contacts to agencies and support services at school and in the community. -Plans and runs workshops based on parent survey selections -Organizes parent volunteers to support various school events. -Serves as a hub for families to meet informally before, during and after school. -New Family Welcome Committee School Leadership Team: our parents are active partners on the SLT.  Parent Association: Runs quarterly meetings. Topics include curriculum, testing, planning, special events for families. 5.P.S. 94x will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents/guardians, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial minority background). P.S. 94x will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. P.S. 94x will conduct a parent survey each year. The results are used to revise and plan parent involvement activities for the coming year. The results will be communicated to parents during their quarterly parent meetings. 6.P.S. 94x will build the school’s and parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 102  a.P.S. 94x will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following: i. State’s academic content standards. ii.State’s student academic achievement standards. iii.State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators. b. P.S. 94x will provide materials and workshops to help parents/guardians work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by: Offering workshops on parent selected topics throughout the year as well as informational meetings regarding curriculum (Meet & Greet; Open School Weeks), articulation (Grade 4 and Grade 5 Parent Meetings) and preschool entry (Kindergarten Open House). Maintaining a variety of on-line programs which can be accessed from home are listed on our school website. The school library maintains Open Access hours for parents every day. A monthly calendar along with follow-up flyers is regularly distributed to inform parents of upcoming events and school activities. A school website provides a wealth of information for parents and students to use. c. P.S. 94x will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil personnel services, principal and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools: Parents are informed of school activities via the school website, monthly school wide calendars, follow-up flyers, School Messenger Service, parent letters and alerts from the administration and from the teachers. d. P.S. 94x will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate an integrate parental involvement programs and activities with Head Start, Reading First, Early Reading First, Even Start, Home 2018-19 SCEP-FF 103  Instruction Programs for Preschool Youngsters, the Parents as Teachers Program, and public preschool and other programs and Conduct other activities, such as parent resource centers, that encourage and support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children by: P.S. 94x collaborates with the Mosholu Montefiore Community Center which runs a community preschool program. In June, the school hosts Open Houses for in-coming kindergarten children and their families. The Open Houses provide an opportunity for the preschool families to meet with our school community. e. P.S. 94x will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand. Parent notices are backpacked. Notices are posted at main door entrances and School Community Bulletin boards. Translations of information in other languages are made by school staff, NYC Translation Unit, “Google Translate” and outside contracted agencies. Parents are contacted by phone as the need arises. The school website and school messenger are also utilized. 7. Community Engagement Partnerships:  P.S. 94x Parent Association  OST Programs – Mosholu Montefiore Community Center - All Grades  ●After School Program  ●Summer Away Day Camp- Summer of 2018 K - 5  P.S. 94x Parents Learning Leaders Group   Box Tops for Education Fundraising Food Bank of the City of New York   Health First  Ridgewood Savings Bank (Grades 1, 2 and 3)   Guidance Interns Student Teachers  First Book.org   NYPL Mosholu Branch  Arts Horizons   Boy Scouts Lehman College Art Gallery IDRA Coca Cola Studios In a School 2018-19 SCEP-FF 104  Lehman College Art Gallery Project   Mathletics  Playworks  Rosetta Stone  MyOn Reading  Turnaround for Schools Grants:  Robin Hood Library Grant:  ▪Provides instruction and resources aligned to the school curriculum ▪Provides Open Access hours for students and their families before and after school, ongoing purchase of resources aligned to DOE and State instructional initiatives ▪Yearlong Reading Challenge Competition - Grades 2 – 5 ▪Second Grade Reading Challenge and Tiger Day Event ▪Book Fairs ▪Parent Workshops  Council Grants from Councilman Andrew Cohen Technology Grant  ELL/SWD Arts Grant  Donors Choose Grants for teacher projects- more than 50 teachers funded to date Parental Involvement and School Quality Description of How P.S. 94x – Kings College School will Implement Required Parent Involvement Policy Component to Improve School Quality 1.P.S. 94x will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under Section 1112 of the ESSA: The Parent Association Executive Board will meet with the Principal once a month. The needs of the parents are assessed by survey each year. An Overview Curriculum Guide is sent out every month to update parents on the focus of each curriculum area of instruction. A monthly calendar is sent out to inform parents of assemblies, parent meetings, etc. and posted on our website. Class trips are posted on the school website calendar. Parent workshop offerings are sent out regularly to parents. The School Community Bulletin Board is also used to publicize events in multiple languages. There is also a school Website that translates into Spanish and Bengali when parents select the language. A Parent Messenger phone system is also used to notify parents of significant events and their child’s attendance. The service is provided in English and Spanish. 2.P.S. 94x will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 105  The P.S. 94x Parent Association Executive Board is a part of the School Leadership Team. Parents are notified by letter and at an annual meeting of school academic standing according to the New York State Department of Education. 3.P.S. 94x will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: The Parent Association works with the administration and the Parent Coordinator to offer support and assistance in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities. Parent Coordinator maintains a regular dialogue with parents to publicize school events, address parent concerns and serve as a liaison between the school and the parents. School Assessment Team, School Counselors, teachers, Parent Coordinator and administrators work with parents and students to plan for student improvement through Child Study Meetings, Individual Education Plans [IEPs], Parent-Teacher meetings, and Parent-Teacher Conferences. 4.P.S. 94x will coordinate and integrate Title I parental involvement strategies through the following programs: ●Parent Workshops ●Robin Hood Library Open Access ●Parent Volunteers Program ●Cookshop for Families Workshop Series ●Family Workshops/Events ●Faculty-led Workshops We engage parents in the following ways:  Family Center run by our Parent Coordinator: -Supports families in our school community by providing translation services, introductions to key staff members at the school, and contacts to agencies and support services at school and in the community. -Plans and runs workshops based on parent survey selections -Organizes parent volunteers to support various school events. -Serves as a hub for families to meet informally before, during and after school. -New Family Welcome Committee  School Leadership Team: our parents are active partners on the SLT. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 106  Parent Association: Runs quarterly meetings. Topics include curriculum, testing, planning, special events for families. 5.P.S. 94x will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents/guardians, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial minority background). P.S. 94x will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. P.S. 94x will conduct a parent survey each year. The results are used to revise and plan parent involvement activities for the coming year. The results will be communicated to parents during their quarterly parent meetings. 6.P.S. 94x will build the school’s and parents’ capacity for strong parental involvement to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: a.P.S. 94x will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following: i. State’s academic content standards. ii.State’s student academic achievement standards. iii.State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators. b. P.S. 94x will provide materials and workshops to help parents/guardians work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement by: Offering workshops on parent selected topics throughout the year as well as informational meetings regarding curriculum (Meet & Greet; Open School Weeks), articulation (Grade 4 and Grade 5 Parent Meetings) and preschool entry (Kindergarten Open House). Maintaining a variety of on-line programs which can be accessed from home are listed on our school website. The school library maintains Open Access hours for parents every day. A monthly 2018-19 SCEP-FF 107  calendar along with follow-up flyers is regularly distributed to inform parents of upcoming events and school activities. A school website provides a wealth of information for parents and students to use. c. P.S. 94x will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil personnel services, principal and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools: Parents are informed of school activities via the school website, monthly school wide calendars, follow-up flyers, School Messenger Service, parent letters and alerts from the administration and from the teachers. d. P.S. 94x will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate an integrate parental involvement programs and activities with Head Start, Reading First, Early Reading First, Even Start, Home Instruction Programs for Preschool Youngsters, the Parents as Teachers Program, and public preschool and other programs and Conduct other activities, such as parent resource centers, that encourage and support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children by: P.S. 94x collaborates with the Mosholu Montefiore Community Center which runs a community preschool program. In June, the school hosts Open Houses for in-coming kindergarten children and their families. The Open Houses provide an opportunity for the preschool families to meet with our school community. e. P.S. 94x will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 108  Parent notices are backpacked. Notices are posted at main door entrances and School Community Bulletin boards. Translations of information in other languages are made by school staff, NYC Translation Unit, “Google Translate” and outside contracted agencies. Parents are contacted by phone as the need arises. The school website and school messenger are also utilized. 7. Community Engagement Partnerships:  P.S. 94x Parent Association  OST Programs – Mosholu Montefiore Community Center - All Grades  ●After School Program  ●Summer Away Day Camp- Summer of 2017 K - 5   Montefiore Medical Center  P.S. 94x Parents Group  Turnaround for Schools   Box Tops for Education Fundraising Food Bank of the City of New York   Health First  Ridgewood Savings Bank (Grades 1, 2 and 3)   Guidance Interns Student Teachers  First Book.org   NYPL Mosholu Branch  Arts Horizons   Boy Scouts   Mathletics  MyOn Reading Lehman College Art Gallery Project Lehman College Art Gallery Learning Leaders IDRA Coca Cola Studios In a School Grants:  Robin Hood Library Grant:  ▪Provides instruction and resources aligned to the school curriculum ▪Provides Open Access hours for students and their families before and after school, ongoing purchase of resources aligned to DOE and State instructional initiatives ▪Yearlong Reading Challenge Competition - Grades 2 – 5 ▪Second Grade Reading Challenge and Tiger Day Event ▪Book Fairs ▪Parent Workshops  Council Grants from Councilman Andrew Cohen 2018-19 SCEP-FF 109  Technology Grant - PowerMyLearning  Council for the Arts Grant creating literacy based murals for the Annex walls  Donors Choose Grants for teacher projects- more than 50 teachers funded to date   Library Parents as Partners Grant – Spring 2017 at the Annex for our Kindergarten and First Grade families The following Enrichment Programs take place all school year and are activities provided to our students. Student Council Grades 4 - 5   Governed by student voted peers Supports Community Service Initiatives Fifth Grade students assist with planning Fifth Grade Spirit Week Studios in a School – Grades 4 and 5  Cool Culture Pass - K  Cook Shop Classroom – K and 1   MyOn Reading – Home & School Web-based Literacy Program  Mathletics  A-Z Learning  The following Enrichment Activities take place over a series of weeks during the school year and are activities provided to our students. Spelling Bee Competition- Grades 4 and 5 Spring Talent Show (IDOL) Literacy Academic Intervention Programs: Wilson, Just Words, Reading Recovery  Robin Hood Second Grade Reading Challenge and TIGER Day Celebration (involves parents as well)  Robin Hood Yearlong Reading Challenge - Grades 2 – 5   Math Fact Competition- Grades 2 – 5  Book Fairs – Fall, Winter and Spring K - 5  Rockin' Readers - Spring K-5    Math small groups  Parent Workshops  Monthly Calendar Activities  At-risk student counseling groups  Class LEADER BUCKS – Whole-Class Acknowledgement System   CICO (Check In-Check Out) Club CICO Card Program  Student LEADER TICKETS – Individual Student Acknowledgement System Leader In Me Clubs – A variety of club activities based on student interests that target The Leader in Me habits, run by faculty. The School Parent Involvement Policy was developed jointly with, and agreed upon by parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs. The Policy is distributed yearly to all parents at Parent-Teacher Conferences and is posted on the school website. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 110  Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement P.S. 94x will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand. -Parent notices are backpacked. Notices are posted at main door entrances and School Community Bulletin boards. Translations of information in other languages are made by school staff, NYC Translation Unit, “Google Translate” and outside contracted agencies. Parents are contacted by phone as the need arises. The school website and school messenger are also utilized. - A Family Handbook is distributed at the beginning of each year which contains the following information: Letter from the Principal Letter from the Lighthouse Team Mission and Vision Statements Leader in Me Expectation Student Behavioral Contract Electronic Device Policy Parent Involvement Policy Homework Policy Technology Acceptable Use Policy School Compacts Consent to Photograph, Film Videotape Tear Out Page School Calendar School Procedures 2018-19 SCEP-FF 111  First Days of School Kindergarten Kindergarten Arrival and Dismissal (beginning September 12) First Grade Arrival and Dismissal Second Grade Annex Arrival and Dismissal Second Grade Main Building Arrival and Dismissal Third Grade Arrival and Dismissal Fourth Grade Arrival and Dismissal Fifth Grade Arrival and Dismissal School Bus Arrival Breakfast Lateness Late Pick Up School Bus Dismissal Dismissal to MMCC Afterschool Program Dismissal Routine Changes Early Dismissal Recess and Lunch Recess Lunch Snack and Birthday Parties Illness and Attendance Communication Backpack Mail School Website Class Web Page Teacher Communication 2018-19 SCEP-FF 112  Parent Engagement Tuesdays September “Meet and Greet” Parent-Teacher Conferences Report Cards Who to Contact with a Question or Concern School/Community Contacts Required School Forms Blue Emergency Cards Physical Exam Forms Lunch Forms Student Behavioral Contract, Electronic Device Policy, Parent Involvement Policy, Homework Policy, Technology Acceptable Use Policy, Consent to Photograph, Film, Videotape, School Compacts, Tear Out Page Citywide Behavioral Expectations to Support Student Learning Personal Items Lost and Found Safety and Security Visitors Elevator Fire Drills/Emergency Evacuation School Closings Field Trips/Chaperones Transportation Kindergarten, Grades 1 and 2 Grades 3, 4 and 5 2018-19 SCEP-FF 113  Discipline Policy for Bus Riders Support Services Parent Coordinator Guidance Counselors School Assessment Team (SAT) School Nurses MMCC Afterschool Program School Leadership Team (SLT) Parent Association (PA) Volunteering Look to Help Earn respect Admire success Don’t give up School Promise: We agree to: School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact: Leader Expectations Set expectations for appropriate behavior   Practice Leader values in all school locations  Have a bully-free environment  Teach students how to peacefully resolve conflicts   Have individual counseling and small group instruction for students that engage in inappropriate behavior  Team up with parents/guardians to create a respectful, and positive community of life-long leaders Inform parents/guardians when students act inappropriately Parent/Guardians Promise: We agree to  Know Leader expectations 2018-19 SCEP-FF 114  Help my child practice Leader behaviors  Be a positive role model for my child  Help my child peacefully resolve conflicts   Meet or speak with the school community about my child  Team up with school and community to build a respectful and positive community of leaders. Let the school know if there is a problem that gets in the way of learning. Student Promise: I agree to  Know and practice Leader behaviors  Get 10 hours of sleep each night  Come to school on time  Eat breakfast at home or at school  Do my homework each day  Dress appropriately every day  Peacefully resolve conflicts  Tell an adult if I have a problem at school  Every day I learn, work hard, and try my best The School-Parent Compact: COMMUNICATION School Pledge: We agree to Inform parents of students’ progress   Distribute 10X094.org email addresses of staff members  Hold three Parent/Teacher Conferences each year  Hold a “Meet and Greet” in September each year  Hold an “Open House” for incoming kindergarten students and their families  Respond to inquiries in a timely fashion  Use School Messenger and our school website to communicate scheduled events and attendance information  Provide information regarding our school status, report cards, Quality Review and Principal’s Performance Review  Provide progress reports on individual students upon request of a parent/guardian  Provide monthly curriculum overviews to parents   Send home monthly calendar of events Send home announcements in a timely fashion Parents/Guardians Pledge: We agree to  Provide updated contact information on blue emergency card and notify main office in writing  Provide updated contact information to classroom teachers  Provide email and telephone numbers  Respond to school inquiries in a timely fashion   Read documents sent home by the school  Attend school functions pertaining to my child Sign and return documents sent home by the school in a timely fashion 2018-19 SCEP-FF 115  Listen to my children Student Pledge: I agree to  Give information sent home by the school to my parents/guardians  Inform my parents/guardians of school functions The School-Parent Compact: READING College and Career Readiness School Pledge: We agree to Foster a love of reading by engaging students in meaningful discussions about their reading  Teach our students to read   Provide materials and opportunities to read in school  Assign and monitor reading homework every night  Provide additional support to students who are struggling  Provide parents/guardians and students with test preparation strategies that can be practiced at home  Celebrate our successes in reading  Use our schools’ website to access reading resources  Attend family workshops at school  Share our joy of reading Parents/Guardians Pledge: We agree to  Encourage our children to read by taking them places where they can read  Read together with them and/or read to them  Monitor our child’s reading habits by talking to them about what they have read  Help our child prepare for standardized tests  Share our joy of reading Student Pledge: I agree to  Go to the library and read  Read with my family at home and at the library  Practice understanding what I am reading by discussing what I read with others  Promise to complete assigned books that I begin  Read a wide variety of reading materials  Read during silent sustained reading and every evening at home  Read at least the minimum number of books by fulfilling THE PS94 KINGS COLLEGE SCHOOL standard of at least 30 books during the school year  Demonstrate evidence of reading assignments that meet or exceed the Common Core Standard  Broaden and deepen comprehension levels using related s reading resources 2018-19 SCEP-FF 116  Share my joy of reading The School-Parent Compact: WRITING College and Career Readiness School Pledge: We agree to Foster a love of writing by engaging students in meaningful discussions about their writing  Teach our students to write in all genres   Provide materials and opportunities to write in school  Assign and monitor writing homework every night  Provide additional support to students who are struggling  Provide parents/guardians and students with test preparation strategies that can be practiced at home  Celebrate our successes in writing  Share our joy of writing Parents/Guardians Pledge: We agree to  Encourage our children to write by reading their work and encouraging them  Write with our child  Monitor our child’s writing habits by talking to them about what they have written  Help our child prepare for standardized tests  Share our joy of writing Student Pledge: I agree to  Write and revise my work  Practice understanding what I am writing by discussing what I wrote with others  Completing writing assignments  Write in a wide variety of genres  Write every evening  Proofread my work and my peer’s work when we are partnering  Demonstrate evidence of writing assignments that meet or exceed the Common Core Standards  Broaden and deepen my ability to produce quality written work by using related resources, activities/lessons  Share my joy of writing with my family The School-Parent Compact: MATHEMATICS College and Career Readiness School Pledge: We agree to  Teach our students according to the Common Core Math Standards  Assign and monitor math homework every night  Provide additional support to students who are struggling  Provide parents/guardians and students with test preparation strategies that can be practiced at home 2018-19 SCEP-FF 117  Celebrate our successes in math  Practice different math strategies with our students  Share our joy of math Parents/Guardians Pledge: We agree to  Expose our child to opportunities that will allow them to practice math skills  Be actively involved with our child’s homework assignments, math projects, etc.  Help reinforce math concepts at home  Help our child prepare for standardized tests  Attend family workshops at school  Share my joy of math Student Pledge: I agree to Learn and use math vocabulary and concepts at school and in my everyday life  Participate in all math activities in school   Ask for help when I need to  Complete homework assignments  Practice basic math facts until I know them by heart   Study for all tests Share my joy of math The School-Parent Compact: Technology Parent/Guardian Pledge:  As the parent or legal guardian, I have read and I have reviewed with my child the Technology Acceptable Use Policy for PS94 Students.       I understand that the use of these electronic information resources is for educational purposes. I recognize that the NYCDOE has initiated reasonable safeguards to filter and monitor inappropriate materials. I understand that while the NYCDOE has taken steps to restrict student access on the Internet to inappropriate information and sites, it is impossible to restrict access to all controversial materials. I further recognize that if my child does not abide by the rules of acceptable use, He / She will be disciplined. I will not hold PS94 or the NYCDOE responsible for materials my child may acquire on the Internet. I hereby give permission to PS94 to permit my child to have access to the Internet. Student Pledge:  My parent or legal guardian has reviewed the Technology Acceptable Use Policy for PS94 Students with me.   I understand the importance of obeying the rules for the use of the computer and the Internet. I understand the importance of not giving out personal information about myself or my family over the Internet. I understand that the computer, the Internet and other electronic information resources are to be used only for educational purposes.  2018-19 SCEP-FF 118   I understand that if I break the rules, my use of these educational tools may be taken away from me and that other disciplinary or legal action may be taken. I promise to follow the rules. STUDENT BEHAVIORAL CONTRACT 2018-2019 STUDENT SECTION I know that I have a right to:  be in a safe school, free from discrimination, harassment and bigotry;    due process of law when I violate school regulations for which I may be suspended or removed from class. know what is correct behavior and what behaviors may result in disciplinary actions; counseling by staff about my behavior and how it affects my education and welfare in school; I agree to: come to school on time with the assistance of my parents, prepared to work; resolve conflicts peacefully and express my feelings in words;   use courteous and polite language;  participate in class/community meetings to acknowledge a person’s thoughtfulness, assistance or courtesy;   dress in a clean, neat and safe manner;     take care of my personal belongings and respect other people’s belongings; tell my parents/guardians what I learned in school each day; complete my homework every day and show it to my parent(s)/guardian(s); follow the rules of the Discipline Code. I have discussed this with my parents/guardians and I will follow this agreement. PARENT/GUARDIAN SECTION I have received a copy of the Discipline Code and Bill of Student Rights and Responsibilities and understand the behavior that is required of my child. I agree to:  encourage my child to be a respectful and peaceful member of the school community  discuss the Discipline Code and the Bill of Rights and Responsibilities with my child  participate in parent conferences, class programs and other activities in which my child is involved assure that my child will arrive at school on time every day   provide a quiet place for my child to do his/her homework 2018-19 SCEP-FF 119 spend at least 15 minutes each day reading with my child listen to my child retell his/her school day experiences    provide the school with current telephone numbers and emergency contact information  alert the school if there are any significant changes in my child’s health or well-being that affects his/her ability to perform in school I understand that my participation in my child’s education will help him/her be successful in school. I have read this agreement and I will carry out my responsibilities to the best of my ability. SCHOOL-BASED POLICY OF PS94 FOR USE OF CELL PHONES, COMPUTING DEVICES, AND PORTABLE MUSIC AND ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEMS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY 2018-2019 A. The use of cell phones, computing devices and portable music and entertainment systems at school is subject to the conditions below: 1. Cell phones and portable music and entertainment systems may not be turned on or used during the administration of any school quiz, test or examination. 2. Computing devices may not be turned on or used during the administration of any school quiz, test or examination, except where such use has been explicitly authorized by PS 94 or is contained in an Individualized Education Program or Section504 Accommodation Plan. 3. Cell phones, computing devices, and portable music and entertainment systems may not be turned on or used during school fire drills or other emergency preparedness exercises. 4. Cell phones, computing devices, and portable music and entertainment systems may not be used in bathrooms or locker rooms. 5. Students who use cell phones, computing devices, and/or portable music and entertainment systems in violation of any provision of the DOE’s Discipline Code, the school’s policy, Chancellor’s regulationA-413, and/or the DOE’s Internet Acceptable Use and Safety Policy (“IAUSP”) will be subject to discipline in accordance with the guidance interventions and disciplinary responses set forth in the Discipline Code. B. Cell phones may not be turned on or used while on PS 94 school property. During after-school, school-sponsored programs or activities, cells phones may be used ONLY after obtaining permission from supervising teacher. C. No personal computing devices are permitted to be turned on or used while on PS 94 school property. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 120  During after-school, school-sponsored programs or activities, personal computing devices may be used ONLY after obtaining permission from supervising teacher. D. No personal portable music and entertainment systems are permitted to be turned on or used while on PS 94 school property. During after-school, school-sponsored programs or activities, personal portable music and entertainment systems may be used ONLY after obtaining permission from supervising teacher. E. Confiscation and return of electronic devices. If a student is found with an electronic device turned on or in use while on PS 94 school property, the following measures will be taken: First Offense: Verbal warning to student. Second Offense: Confiscation of device and return following parent conference with member of Administration or Guidance. Third Offense: Confiscation of device and return following student and parent conference with member of Administration or Guidance in which they enter into the following behavioral contract: BEHAVIORAL CONTRACT I, ____________________, agree to keep any electronic device turned off and not in use (print name of student) while I am on school property. I understand that if I am found with any electronic device turned on or in use, I will be banned from bringing any electronic device to school for the remainder of the school year. I, ____________________, understand and agree to the terms of this behavioral contract. (print name of parent) DATED: ________________ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 121  __________________ _________________________ _________________ Signature of Student Signature of Parent Signature of PS 94 Representative PS94 shall not be responsible for any lost, damaged or stolen electronic devices brought onto school property. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum The following Enrichment Programs take place all school year and are activities provided to our students. Student Council Grades 4 - 5 Supports Community Service Initiatives Fifth Grade students assist with planning Fifth Grade Spirit Week   Governed by student voted peers    Cool Culture Pass - K  Cook Shop Classroom – K and 1    MyOn Reading – Home & School Web-based Literacy Program  Mathletics  A-Z Learning Studios in a School – Grades 4 and 5 STEP Team The following Enrichment Activities take place over a series of weeks during the school year and are activities provided to our students. Spelling Bee Competition- Grades 4 and 5 Spring Talent Show (IDOL) Literacy Academic Intervention Programs: Wilson, Just Words, Reading Recovery  Robin Hood Second Grade Reading Challenge and TIGER Day Celebration (involves parents as well)  Robin Hood Yearlong Reading Challenge - Grades 2 – 5   Math Fact Competition- Grades 2 – 5  Book Fairs – Fall, Winter and Spring K - 5    GO Math small groups  Parent Workshops  Monthly Calendar Activities  At-risk student counseling groups  Class LEADER BUCKS – Whole-Class Acknowledgement System   CICO (Check In-Check Out) Club CICO Card Program Student LEADER TICKETS – Individual Student Acknowledgement System 2018-19 SCEP-FF 122  Leader In Me Clubs – A variety of club activities based on student interests that target The Leader in Me habits, run by faculty. The following Enrichment Activities take place over a series of weeks during the school year and are activities provided to our students. Spelling Bee Competition- Grades 4 and 5  Robin Hood Second Grade Reading Challenge and TIGER Day Celebration (involves parents as well)  Robin Hood Yearlong Reading Challenge - Grades 2 – 5   Math Fact Competition- Grades 3 – 5  Book Fairs – Fall, Winter and Spring K - 5   Spring Talent Show (IDOL) Literacy Academic Intervention Programs: Wilson, FUNDATIONS, Just Words, Reading Recovery, Guided Reading Leader Bucks – Whole-Class Acknowledgement System with Class Celebrations LEAD TICKETS – Individual Student Acknowledgement System Leader in Me for Parents Leader In Me School Store - Students earn LEAD Tickets and use them to purchase items Lead Card Program (Check In-Check Out) Student Clubs – A variety of club activities based on student interests  Math small groups  Parent Workshops  Monthly Calendar Activities  At-risk student counseling groups        Peer Mediation (Grades 3 – 5) supports students in resolving disputes peacefully    Cool Culture Pass - K  Cook Shop Classroom – K and 1  Studios in a School – Grades 4 and 5 Student Council Grades 3 – 5 Governed by student voted peers, Supports Community Service Initiatives Fifth Grade students assist with planning Fifth Grade Spirit Week The School-Parent Compact: Literacy School’s Pledge: We agree to • Teach our students to read • Foster a love of reading by engaging students in meaningful discussions about their reading • Pledge to provide materials and opportunities to read in school • Assign reading homework every night • Provide additional support to students who are struggling • Monitor reading homework • Provide parents/guardians and students with test preparation strategies that can be practiced at home 2018-19 SCEP-FF 123  • Celebrate our successes in reading The School-Parent Compact: Mathematics School’s Pledge: We agree to • Teach students according to state math standards • Assign math homework on a daily basis • Provide additional support to students who are struggling • Celebrate our math successes • Monitor homework • Practice different math strategies with our students • Provide parents/guardians and students with test prep strategies that can be practiced at home The School-Parent Compact: Science School’s Pledge: We agree to • Teach students according to science standards • Provide students with the opportunity to have a central role in the discovery process • Provide additional support for students who are struggling • Celebrate our science successes • Practice different scientific thinking processes The School-Parent Compact: Social Studies School’s Pledge: We agree to • Teach students according to State Social Studies standards • Provide students with the opportunity to have a central role in the discovery process • Provide additional support for students who are struggling 2018-19 SCEP-FF 124  • Celebrate our social studies successes The School-Parent Compact: The Arts School’s Pledge: We agree to • Expose students to experiences in the Arts as outlined in the New York City Benchmarks for the Visual Arts • Allow students to exercise their imagination through exploration of art materials • Expose students to a variety of the best art materials and techniques • Foster a love and appreciation of Art by displaying our students’ work in our school • Celebrate creativity by allowing students to give meaning to their experiences through drawing • Study and honor the art history of our culture and the culture of others The School-Parent Compact- Physical and Health Education/Creative Dance Movement School’s Pledge: We agree to • Provide our students with the necessary knowledge and skills to establish and maintain physical fitness, participate in physical activities and maintain personal health • Equip our students with the knowledge necessary to create and maintain personal health • Teach our students how to manage their personal and community resources The School-Parent Compact: Expectations for Community Living - PBIS School’s Pledge: We agree to • Treat our students with respect • Implement character education school wide • Implement PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports) school wide • Celebrate positive citizenship • Set clear expectations for appropriate school behavior • Provide peer mediation to assist students in resolving disagreements peacefully with peers • Inform parents when students engage in inappropriate conduct 2018-19 SCEP-FF 125  • Partner with the parents in building a mutually respectful, nurturing learning environment The School-Parent Compact: Communication School’s Pledge: We agree to • Inform parents of students’ progress • Distribute NYDOE email addresses of staff members • Hold three Parent/Teacher Conferences, one each school semester • Hold a “Meet and Greet,” at the beginning of each school year • Hold an “Open House,” for incoming kindergarten students and their families • Respond to inquiries in a timely fashion • Use School Messenger and our school website to communicate scheduled events and attendance information • Provide information regarding our state status, report cards, Quality Review and Principal’s Performance Review • Provide progress reports on individual students upon request of a parent/guardian • Provide periodic curriculum overviews to parents • Send home monthly calendar of events • Send home announcements in a timely fashion I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships As defined in Section 9101(32) of the ESSA, the term parental involvement” means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring 1. that parents/guardians play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; 2. that parents/guardians are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; 3. that parents/guardians are full partners in their child's education and are included, as appropriate, in decision making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; 4. the carrying out of other activities, as described Section 1118. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 126  I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Parents/Guardians are given reasonable access to staff through the following:  Backpack Mail School Website   Class Web Pages  Parent Engagement Tuesdays September "Meet and Greet"   Parent-Teacher Conferences  Parent Coordinator  Guidance Counselors   New Family Welcome Committee Family Center run by Parent Coordinator Parents/Guardians are provided with general support through the following: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Backpack Mail School Website   Class Web Pages  Parent Engagement Tuesdays September "Meet and Greet"   Parent-Teacher Conferences  Parent Coordinator  Guidance Counselors  Family Handbook Parent/Guardian Pledge: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  As the parent or legal guardian, I have read and I have reviewed with my child the Technology Acceptable Use Policy for PS94 Students.       I understand that the use of these electronic information resources is for educational purposes. I recognize that the NYCDOE has initiated reasonable safeguards to filter and monitor inappropriate materials. I understand that while the NYCDOE has taken steps to restrict student access on the Internet to inappropriate information and sites, it is impossible to restrict access to all controversial materials. I further recognize that if my child does not abide by the rules of acceptable use, He / She will be disciplined. I will not hold PS94 or the NYCDOE responsible for materials my child may acquire on the Internet. I hereby give permission to PS94 to permit my child to have access to the Internet. School-Parent Compact: Leader Expectations 2018-19 SCEP-FF 127  Look to Help Earn respect Admire success Don’t give up Parent/Guardians Promise: We agree to  Know Leader expectations  Help my child practice Leader behaviors  Be a positive role model for my child  Help my child peacefully resolve conflicts   Meet or speak with the school community about my child  Team up with school and community to build a respectful and positive community of leaders. Let the school know if there is a problem that gets in the way of learning. The School-Parent Compact: COMMUNICATION Parents/Guardians Pledge: We agree to  Provide updated contact information on blue emergency card and notify main office in writing  Provide updated contact information to classroom teachers  Provide email and telephone numbers  Respond to school inquiries in a timely fashion   Read documents sent home by the school  Attend school functions pertaining to my child  Sign and return documents sent home by the school in a timely fashion Listen to my children The School-Parent Compact: READING College and Career Readiness Parents/Guardians Pledge: We agree to  Encourage our children to read by taking them places where they can read  Read together with them and/or read to them  Monitor our child’s reading habits by talking to them about what they have read  Help our child prepare for standardized tests 2018-19 SCEP-FF 128  Share our joy of reading The School-Parent Compact: WRITING College and Career Readiness Parents/Guardians Pledge: We agree to  Encourage our children to write by reading their work and encouraging them  Write with our child  Monitor our child’s writing habits by talking to them about what they have written  Help our child prepare for standardized tests  Share our joy of writing The School-Parent Compact: MATHEMATICS College and Career Readiness Parents/Guardians Pledge: We agree to  Expose our child to opportunities that will allow them to practice math skills  Be actively involved with our child’s homework assignments, math projects, etc.  Help reinforce math concepts at home  Help our child prepare for standardized tests  Attend family workshops at school  Share my joy of math Student Pledge: III. Student Responsibilities  My parent or legal guardian has reviewed the Technology Acceptable Use Policy for PS94 Students with me.   I understand the importance of obeying the rules for the use of the computer and the Internet. I understand the importance of not giving out personal information about myself or my family over the Internet. I understand that the computer, the Internet and other electronic information resources are to be used only for educational purposes. I understand that if I break the rules, my use of these educational tools may be taken away from me and that other disciplinary or legal action may be taken. I promise to follow the rules.    2018-19 SCEP-FF 129  School-Parent-Student Compact: Leader Expectations Look to Help Earn respect Admire success Don’t give up Student Promise: I agree to  Know and practice Leader behaviors  Get 10 hours of sleep each night  Come to school on time  Eat breakfast at home or at school  Do my homework each day  Dress appropriately every day  Peacefully resolve conflicts  Tell an adult if I have a problem at school  Every day I learn, work hard, and try my best  Wear my uniform daily The School-Parent Compact: TECHNOLOGY Student Pledge:  My parent or legal guardian has reviewed the Technology Acceptable Use Policy for PS94 Students with me.   I understand the importance of obeying the rules for the use of the computer and the Internet. I understand the importance of not giving out personal information about myself or my family over the Internet. I understand that the computer, the Internet and other electronic information resources are to be used only for educational purposes. I understand that if I break the rules, my use of these educational tools may be taken away from me and that other disciplinary or legal action may be taken. I promise to follow the rules.     The School-Parent Compact: COMMUNICATION 2018-19 SCEP-FF 130  Student Pledge: I agree to  Give information sent home by the school to my parents/guardians  Inform my parents/guardians of school functions The School-Parent Compact: READING College and Career Readiness Student Pledge: I agree to  Go to the library and read  Read with my family at home and at the library  Practice understanding what I am reading by discussing what I read with others  Promise to complete assigned books that I begin  Read a wide variety of reading materials  Read during silent sustained reading and every evening at home  Read at least the minimum number of books by fulfilling THE PS94 KINGS COLLEGE SCHOOL standard of at least 30 books during the school year  Demonstrate evidence of reading assignments that meet or exceed the Common Core Standard  Broaden and deepen comprehension levels using related s reading resources  Share my joy of reading The School-Parent Compact: WRITING College and Career Readiness Student Pledge: I agree to  Write and revise my work  Practice understanding what I am writing by discussing what I wrote with others  Completing writing assignments  Write in a wide variety of genres  Write every evening  Proofread my work and my peer’s work when we are partnering  Demonstrate evidence of writing assignments that meet or exceed the Common Core Standards  Broaden and deepen my ability to produce quality written work by using related resources, activities/lessons  Share my joy of writing with my family The School-Parent Compact: MATHEMATICS College and Career Readiness Student Pledge: I agree to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 131 Learn and use math vocabulary and concepts at school and in my everyday life  Participate in all math activities in school   Ask for help when I need to  Complete homework assignments  Practice basic math facts until I know them by heart   Study for all tests Share my joy of math The School-Parent Compact: SCIENCE College and Career Readiness Student’s Pledge: I agree to • Follow the science class rules • Try my best and participate in all science investigations • Ask for help when I need it The School-Parent Compact: SOCIAL STUDIES College and Career Readiness Student’s Pledge: I agree to • Follow the social studies class rules • Try my best and participate in social studies projects. • Ask for help when I need it The School-Parent Compact: ART College and Career Readiness Student’s Pledge: I agree to • Take my Artwork home to show my family • Always try my best especially when a new material or experience is given to me • Complete my Art projects • Use my time in Art wisely 2018-19 SCEP-FF 132  • Express my experiences through Art The School-Parent Compact: PHYSICAL EDUCATION College and Career Readiness Student’s Pledge: I agree to • Enter and leave the gym in line as described by my instructor • Walk and sit on my floor spot as described by my instructor • Stop, look and listen when I hear the whistle • Always show good sportsmanship • Come dressed and prepared for physical activities STUDENT BEHAVIORAL CONTRACT 2017-2018 I know that I have a right to:  be in a safe school, free from discrimination, harassment and bigotry;    due process of law when I violate school regulations for which I may be suspended or removed from class. know what is correct behavior and what behaviors may result in disciplinary actions; counseling by staff about my behavior and how it affects my education and welfare in school; I agree to: come to school on time with the assistance of my parents, prepared to work; resolve conflicts peacefully and express my feelings in words;   use courteous and polite language;  participate in class/community meetings to acknowledge a person’s thoughtfulness, assistance or courtesy;   dress in a clean, neat and safe manner;     take care of my personal belongings and respect other people’s belongings; tell my parents/guardians what I learned in school each day; complete my homework every day and show it to my parent(s)/guardian(s); follow the rules of the Discipline Code. I have discussed this with my parents/guardians and I will follow this agreement. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 133  SCHOOL-BASED POLICY OF PS94 FOR USE OF CELL PHONES, COMPUTING DEVICES, AND PORTABLE MUSIC AND ENTERTAINMENT SYSTEMS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY 2017-2018 A: The use of cell phones, computing devices and portable music and entertainment systems at school is subject to the conditions below: 1. Cell phones and portable music and entertainment systems may not be turned on or used during the administration of any school quiz, test or examination. 2. Computing devices may not be turned on or used during the administration of any school quiz, test or examination, except where such use has been explicitly authorized by PS 94 or is contained in an Individualized Education Program or Section504 Accommodation Plan. 3. Cell phones, computing devices, and portable music and entertainment systems may not be turned on or used during school fire drills or other emergency preparedness exercises. 4. Cell phones, computing devices, and portable music and entertainment systems may not be used in bathrooms or locker rooms. 5. Students who use cell phones, computing devices, and/or portable music and entertainment systems in violation of any provision of the DOE’s Discipline Code, the school’s policy, Chancellor’s regulation A-413, and/or the DOE’s Internet Acceptable Use and Safety Policy (“IAUSP”) will be subject to discipline in accordance with the guidance interventions and disciplinary responses set forth in the Discipline Code. B: Cell phones may not be turned on or used while on PS 94 school property. During after-school, school-sponsored programs or activities, cells phones may be used ONLY after obtaining permission from supervising teacher. C: No personal computing devices are permitted to be turned on or used while on PS 94 school property. During after-school, school-sponsored programs or activities, personal computing devices may be used ONLY after obtaining permission from supervising teacher. D: No personal portable music and entertainment systems are permitted to be turned on or used while on PS 94 school property. During after-school, school-sponsored programs or activities, personal portable music 2018-19 SCEP-FF 134  and entertainment systems may be used ONLY after obtaining permission from supervising teacher. E. Confiscation and return of electronic items. If a student is found with an electronic item turned on or in use while on PS 94 school property, the following measures will be taken: First Offense: Verbal warning to student. Second Offense: Confiscation of item and return following parent conference with member of Administration or Guidance. Third Offense: Confiscation of item and return following student and parent conference with member of Administration or Guidance in which they enter into the following behavioral contract: BEHAVIORAL CONTRACT I, ____________________, agree to keep any electronic item turned off and not in use while (print name of student) I am on school property. I understand that if I am found with any electronic item turned on or in use, I will be banned from bringing any electronic item to school for the remainder of the school year. I, ____________________, understand and agree to the terms of this behavioral contract. (print name of parent) DATED: ________________ ___________________ ___________________ _____________________ Signature of Student Signature of Parent Signature of PS 94 Representative 2018-19 SCEP-FF 135  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 136  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III After school Program will take place November 2018 through March 2019 on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30-4:30 pm. We will invite a total of 100 ELL students from grades 3, 4 and 5. Our focus is to begin with grade 3 in November and grades 4 and 5 in January. Our Entering & Emerging English Language Learners and Immigrant students will be offered the opportunity to receive explicit classroom direct instruction through literacy, math and technology. Groups will be no larger than 15 per teacher ratio. Student selection criteria will be based upon NYSESLAT, NYSITELL and 2018 Fall MOSL scores identifying ELLs who are academically at risk - Tier 2 or stalling and need support Also students that were identified as remaining stagnant on same proficiency level on NYSESLAT from 2017-2018 scores or regressed a proficiency level as per EDAT Analysis tool will be invited. Our after school program will maximize learning using collaborative group learning as students receive explicit instructional periods to address gaps that are identified in data gathered from their performance from the regular school day. Our intention is to have 5 ENL/BIL teachers and 1 technology teacher who will support and collaborate with planning for our ELLs on Tuesday afternoons from 4:00 to 4:30. Our rationale is to strengthen their language acquisition development within speaking, listening, reading and writing following the SIOP model. In the After school Program for Literacy we are supplementing with On Our Way To English by Rigby and Write Source by Houghton Mifflin along with IReady blended lab model. For Math the Math Club Kit will be utilized which includes activities/games to support our Go Math and Engage NY curriculum. Also IPADS will be utilized for students to use within small group or independently. The technology room will be used by the students (each grade) 40 min rotational basis to access IReady and ELL Enchanted A-Z to further support language development. All instruction will be given in English and Home Language support given as needed. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our professional development plan will support our Title III after school through the participation in NYC RBern offering of ELL workshops at Fordham and DELLSS at no cost to Title III. Teachers will show implementation of this training in their planning during and our after school program. Ongoing professional development will be offered to our teachers through our partnership with Teaching Matters Institute (TMI) Professional 2018-19 SCEP-FF 137  Part C: Professional Development Development Organization. The Organization provides on site and off-site professional development for English Language Arts and Math throughout the year. The sessions in ELA and Math focus on deepening teacher pedagogy skills using center based tasks for students with differentiated needs. ENL teachers and Bilingual teachers use this information to plan horizontally/vertically with teacher teams during and after school. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Parent Coordinator reaches out to the parents of our English Language Learners and Immigrant families and promotes workshops that educate our parents on how to better support their child in academic areas as well as social/emotional areas. This also establishes a better connection between our school and parents (outreach) and strengthens the bond between parent and child (engagement). Our Parent Coordinator - Ms. Miriam Seminario at no cost to Title III implements workshop topics that would benefit our parents and students. A schedule is created for these Workshops to be held on Tuesdays from 2:30pm-4:30pm from September 2018 to June 2019. Tuesdays is mandated Parent Meetings at no cost to Title III. Our Coordinator ensures parents receive this information and attend by sending out invites to register, posting flyers within and outside our school building, and even calling them to remind of date/time/purpose. All this information presented is translated in our dominant home languages here; Spanish and Bengali (written materials) and translators present at workshops as needed. Schedule of Topics TBD: Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 2018-19 SCEP-FF 138  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL ) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 139  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Kings College School Borough Bronx School Number 094 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Diane DaProcida Coach Aleris Quinones ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rosalee Choniuk , Susan Caico Teacher/Subject Area Sonia Vazquez- Tech Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider n/a Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Keicha Bolden Coach Deirdre Kehayas School Counselor Maria Joyce Parent Ms. Rahaman Parent Coordinator Miriam Seminario Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 8 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 5 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1264 2018-19 SCEP-FF 140 Total number of ELLs 334 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.42%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2000 1 1 0 1 K 1 0 1 2012-13 2015-16 Lang. SP SP SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 4 1 0 1 3 1 0 1 2 1 0 1 5 1 0 1 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 1 2 0 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Fountas & Pinnell, Fundations end of unit assessments and EL Sol ( in our transitional bilingual classes) to assess the early literacy skills measure for ELA of our ELLs (K-5) along with Junior Great Books. Informal assessments are completed for sight word vocabulary mastery. We have incorporated the math MOSL within grades K-5 which is translated into Spanish, Bengali and Arabic as needed. We utilize Engage NY, Math in Focus and Go Math Pre Test, Math Unit Performance Task, lesson exit slips which are translated in Spanish as well. The NYSITELL/Spanish lab and NYSESLAT results are utilized to drive instruction and determine literacy needs of our ELLs. Based upon the data our teachers make adjustments to the literacy, math, social studies and science units to scaffold and differentiate activities for the ELLs. From 2017 NYSESLAT results our Entering and Emerging scored lower within the Listening and Speaking domain therefore instruction is tailored to build upon building oral language development through vocabulary, word work, partner conversation, sentence frame scaffolds. Our Transitioning and Expanding ELLs scored lower within Reading and Writing domains. As well as upper grades performed higher in speaking domain and lower in writing. Therefore to build upon these skills Guided Reading and Writing is 2018-19 SCEP-FF 141  infused along with literacy stations with the support of our Literacy Coaches. Students are grouped by level Fountas & Pinnell, NYSESLAT, and Math MOSL results with differentiated tasks within subject areas to meet them at their level and help drive instruction for lesson/unit planning. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers have time to plan and meet weekly during common prep or Monday afternoons to discuss and plan next steps and given support through grade Supervisors, grade lead teachers, ENL staff and our Literacy/Math Coach along with TMI Astor Grant Reading Universal Literacy Coaches K-2. Our Coaches support Guided Reading which is done K-5 four times a week through professional development, modeled lessons within cycles. Our K-2 teachers also incorporate Journeys Literacy Program and adapt components to meet the needs of our ELLs and all students. In our Bilingual Program Senderos program is utilized within the Literacy block. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs through many measures. These measures include, but are not limited to, progress in the following: NYSESLAT, Math MOSL, ELA/MATH State Tests, F & P, RtI benchmark assessments for the research based programs we use, and end of unit performance tasks in ELA and Math, to determine if students are meeting benchmarks and making progress on the criteria of the assessment goal. Additionally, we measure success based on the number of ELLs who are able to advance their proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT as well as pass the ELA in the upper grades. As a result, we use the F & P as a measure of students' progress from the beginning of the year to the end. We use the student progress as measured by the F&P to flexibly group students based on their instructional needs and the progress they have made with the goal of advancing their grade level expectations providing interventions for those who are identified as Tier 2 according to the RtI model. Based on 2017 NYSESLAT results students showed growth as compared to NYSITELL level earlier in year and progressed Entering to Emerging with increase in oral language development (Newcomer). Overall areas of need remain Reading and Writing leading to guided reading, guided writing, literacy stations and modeling/scaffolding support from Coaches. Small group work emphasized with differentiated tasks to meet needs of students based on needs and teachers adjust groups/lessons as students needs change/progress. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Again, for our Guided Reading Groups and RTI within Literacy Block we have flexible grouping to meet students needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RtI framework for grades K-5. All students in tiers 2 and 3 are assessed and placed by need in a number of programs that we implement such as "Just Words", "Fundations", "Wilson" and "Sidewalks" These students meet daily with certified educators utilizing small group instruction to target necessary skills. These students are assessed periodically using the assessment tools in the various programs. Also, Guided Reading is incorporated K-5 to address phonemic awareness and decoding skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 142  As per the 2017 NYSESLAT our findings reveal that all three sessions listening, speaking and reading were equally as challenging for our ELLs. In addition to our ELLs performing low in reading and writing, new current data suggests that speaking and listening has become more of a challenge. The alignment of common core and content vocabulary to the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL has affected the speaking/listening portions of the exams. Additionally, our students stall at the transitioning and expanding levels whereas our IEP students are stalling at the entering and emerging level. This suggests that for our IEP students it might not be a language issue. The patterns observed have impacted our instruction within our self contained ENL, Bilingual and Co-Teaching classrooms. We are tailoring our strategies to take into account the academic needs of our ELLs which include all four modalities. Our findings also reveal that our newcomers also have low proficiency in ENL and in their home language as well. Therefore, more end of unit tasks are embedded that encompasses the different Language modalities and needs of our students. in addition to NYSESLAT results students are flexibily grouped based on F & P and Math MOSL incorporating the 4 domains speaking, listening, reading and writing. This allows the teacher to meet students at their level, use differentiated tasks, incorporate scaffolding techniques to drive/assess instruction and further strengthen areas of weakness through small group, explicit teaching, turn/talk, ENL methodologies, collaborative tasks and guided reading/writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Classroom teachers meet regularly during weekly common planning periods along with Monday afternoons. Student performance data is shared and discussed using student performance observation protocol, indicating strengths/weaknesses and next steps through discussion and planning for unit lessons and tasks. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. We have 7 licensed ENL teachers who service ELLs daily using both stand alone and integrated ENL programs based on student levels for all K-5: entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, and commanding. There are approximately eight classes per grade in our K-5 school. Within each class there are mixed proficiencies of ELLs to be serviced with the intention of grouping entering (newcomer) ELLs to facilitate instruction. Additionally, ENL teachers for grades K-3 will be utilizing the Journeys curriculum. We also have a Kindergarten self-contained ENL classroom. Our self-contained ENL students receive their mandated minutes within the classroom by a dually licensed pedagogue. All organizational models, including self-contained ENL, contain ELL students who are grouped heterogeneously. All content areas are taught through scaffolded ENL instruction. For our stand alone ENL program, we utilize strategies from the SIOP method including daily targeting of explicit language and content/language objectives aligned with the common core. Our ELLS are instructed using small group instruction that incorporates scaffolding. An instructional focus is development of vocabulary within content areas utilizing tools/techniques such as flashcards, four corners, graphic organizers, and pictionaries. Cooperative learning techniques are implemented as well as pairing students by levels. For our integrated ENL model which includes all ELL subgroups (SIFE, newcomers, long term ELLs and SWDs), an ENL teacher and common branch teacher work collaboratively to plan and deliver lessons to entire class to assist students in obtaining language proficiency and help them to reach benchmarks. Daily scaffolding is key to our instructional model. Some of these techniques such as word banks, graphic organizers , vocabulary development (visuals), simplified texts, along with process charts/rubrics which are implemented to assist with their academic skills development in all four core subject areas. These students are introduced and familiarized with standardized testing formats by deconstructing/constructing passages (chunking), jigsaw, questioning, using context clues, note taking, understanding of concepts of text questions such as : compare/contrast, main idea, and making inferences. In 2018-19 SCEP-FF 143  addition, when possible, our students receive additional support through small group explicit instruction targeting content through vocabulary activities, visuals, TPR, realia, scaffolding, modeling and oral language development through targeted conversational activities. Also, when possible, hands on and manipulatives are incorporated as well as technology (Smartboard, computers, ipads). Our Integrated ENL is co -taught between certified ENL teacher and Classroom common branch teacher. They meet, plan and deliver instruction during Literacy block. b. TBE program. If applicable. We have K-4 grade Bilingual/ICT class and one 5th grade Bilingual class. These are all taught by licensed bilingual and special education teachers with exception of 5th grade taught by licensed Bilingual teacher who collaborate to ensure that all instructional needs of all students are being met, for upcoming year our 5th grade Bilingual will be ICT as well. Within our transitional bilingual programs we have students of all proficiency levels. Our TBE program model differs for each grade (K-5) based upon the proficiency levels based on current year. In Kindergarten the percentage ration is 70/30. In first grade the ratio is 40/60. In second grade it is 70/30 and in our third it is a 60/40 model. In our fourth grade it is a 40/60 model and 70/30 ratio model within the 5th grade, the first numbers being taught in the home language. These models change as per proficiency levels and student language development progresses in the Target English. As students become more proficient in the English language teachers differentiate/ tailor and lessen the amount of home language arts scaffolds and focus on increasing their English proficiency. Our GoMath program (Engage NY) within TBE is delivered in English their target language , along with materials in Spanish for support. Lessons are differentiated with an emphasis on vocabulary and critical thinking skills through the use of manipulatives, cooperative learning activities, groups, and games that reinforce concepts taught. For our science program, our school utilizes the FOSS program (Amplify Science) which incorporates content vocabulary and hands on experiments to better facilitate learning. For science and social studies content is taught in the home language and given a linguistic summary in English using ENL strategies such as realia, visuals (Smartboard) and various techniques to assist them in learning the material. Home language instruction includes themes and activities that are academically challenging. The instruction incorporates challenging work that develops cognition and utilizes higher order thinking skills. The minimum of one unit (180 min) of Home Language Arts is taught along with two content areas in the home language of Spanish for Entering/Emerging and Transitioning/Expanding students in Science and Social Studies. Our common core literacy block addresses the five areas of reading instruction: phoenemic awareness, fluency, vocabulary and text comprehension. ELL students will continue to learn content area in their home language with adequate support provided for English language development. Our students are assessed using Fountas & Pinnell, math MOSL, El Sol, Journeys, Senderos, ELE, informal reading running records, writing baselines, and math performance assessments. c. DL program. If applicable. At this time we do not offer a Dual Language program based on Parent Selection requests. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Within our transitional bilingual classes they receive instruction in their home language depending on the percentage level make up of each class/grade and gradually it decreases as their English proficiency increases. For example, our Bilingual Kinder home language is 70% and target language is 30 %, 1 st Bilingual is 40/60 model along with 2 nd Bilingual is 70/30 model , 3 rd Bilingual is 60/40 model, 4th grade is 40/60 and 5th Bilingual is a 70/30 model. Home language support is utilized when necessary and all students receive their mandated one unit of home language arts instruction. The two content areas taught in Spanish are Science and Social Studies. In addition, the ENL component is implemented with entering and emerging students receiving 360 minutes of instruction, transitioning and expanding students receive 180 minutes of instruction and commanding students receive 90 minutes of instruction for an additional two years. Our Entering and Emerging ELLs within ENL receive 1 unit of study of Integrated ENL and 1 unit of study in Stand alone ENL. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding ELLs receive 1 unit of Integrated ENL. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 144  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our science curriculum is hands on and inquiry based currently we use FOSS. Our social studies cluster teachers align lessons with grade curriculum and NYS Common Core Standards incorporating appropriate cooperative learning activities. To facilitate learning, Smartboard activities such as BrainESL Pop and BrainPop Espanol are utilized. Currently, in math we use the Go Math and Math Solutions program and foster language development by providing materials in Spanish as well as using previous NYS Math Exam questions within lessons to strengthen concepts and skills. Research based projects are aligned to Literacy units and Front Row a computer based program to support our English Language Learners in Literacy and Math. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Within our Go Math program students are assessed in their home language (only in Spanish). Also, The Senderos program is used in our bilingual programs as well as EL Sol, Fountas & Pinnell, and Guided Reading instruction. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status In order to differentiate instruction for our newcomer ELLs and SIFE students we implement scaffolded instruction which includes a buddy system that pairs them with a student that when feasible speaks their home language. We use a variety of strategies that include visuals, TPR, hands on activities and cooperative learning. For our ELLs who are 4-6 years or long term, we are implementing daily RTI support which is specifically geared to meet student needs and move them toward grade level expectations. We also provide stand alone and integrated ENL as per required CR-Part154.2 mandates which focus on skills (four modalities) needed to lessen the academic gap. Our former ELLs will continue to receive a half a unit of integrated ENL services for an additional two years along with receiving test accomodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We utilize the Smart board in order to scaffold content to our ELLs-SWDs. We also incorporate cooperative learning groups and buddy systems, technology based programs that are utilized to assist with content learning. In addition, visuals, vocabulary expansion activities, hands on tactile experiments and graphic organizers, along with questioning techniques and simplified text are incorporated to make content comprehensible. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses the integrated co-teaching model with our ELL-SWDs to ensure the least restrictive environment for learning. ENL staff attends grade level common planning meetings to offer input on lessons and provide suggestions for differentiation/scaffolding so students may achieve their IEP goals. At these meetings, scaffolding strategies are discussed as well as lesson plan differentiation when necessary. Additionally, classes are grouped into cohorts that stream across the grade. ENL staff provides school-wide periodic professional development such as SIOP and other strategies to help all ELLs including ELL-SWDs attain English proficiency and meet their IEP goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for ELLs include Wilson Reading, Fundations, Just Words, Reading Recovery, Sidewalks Reading Program during scheduled RTI periods that provide small group explicit instruction. Our intervention services are 2018-19 SCEP-FF 145  offered in English. We also provide Guided Reading 4x a week in grades K-5. In our Bilingual programs Guided Reading starts out in Spanish for our Entering level and transitions to English as per the language needs and development. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 2017-2018 school year more planning time was designated for a more effective co-teach integrated ENL model. In addition we continued the Journeys literacy program for grades K-2 along with our focus on Guided Reading along with upcoming 2018-2019 school year. In grades K-5, coaches are reviewing the current curriculum for literacy and math to embed more science content throughout the literacy units. We will continue to incorporate "Leader In Me" lessons addressing the " 7 Habits of Happy Kids". Also 2018-2019 our Science program FOSS will be replaced by Amplify Science and in addition to Go Math we will utilize Engage NY. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Presently we do not anticipate discontinuing any programs/services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs and clubs such as Leader In Me, Zumba, Science, Boy Scouts, Team Building, Reading, Sports Club, Young Runners, Mighty Milers, Scrapbooking, MyOn Reading, Crochet, Just Dance, Dance STARS, PBIS Ambassadors, CS First Computer, Book Club, Drama, Minecraft, and STEM Club. We also have the following programs: Parent Volunteer group and MMCC wrap around after school program. MMCC is an after-school recreation, homework support and enrichment program. Also, we use the services of our parent coordinator to reach out to families of ELLs to involve them in our programs/PDs. We provide translation on all of our school documents presently in Spanish and Bengali ; our largest ELL groups. We also use DOE intranet translation services, language line and in house staff to ensure all ELLs and students have equal access. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to support ELLs include, but are not limited to: home language glossaries/textbooks/articles, visuals aids such as charts, word walls and graphic organizers, hands on activities with manipulatives, use of Smartboard, iPads and computer based software such as raz-kids, Reading A-Z, abcteach, mathletes, Brainpop Jr. and FrontRow. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is delivered in ENL and TBE programs not only through ENL/ Bilingual teachers but also by school personnel including classroom teachers who provide support orally and written to students during the school day to provide understanding for ELLs who may be struggling with content and concepts in their subject area. In addition, glossaries, dictionaries and materials, especially in Spanish, are provided when necessary. Also, teachers group buddies/students of the same language for certain activities so they can assist each other and respond in the home language and facilitate in English language acquisition. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our school ensures all required services/resources correspond to ELLs' age and grade levels. For our entering/emerging ELLs the focus will be on obtaining language acquisition through the stand alone ENL. For transitioning/expanding students in addition to our entering/emerging, they will receive ENL instruction (stand alone/integrated) that is aligned with grade curriculum within the four modalities in reading, writing, listening, and speaking emphasizing modeling, scaffolding and vocabulary expansion. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 146  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled Kindergarten ELLs and parents are invited to our open house event in May and June. Translators are available during these events to discuss programs and answer all questions. In addition, parent orientation/workshops are offered throughout the year based on the needs of our students/parents. These are facilitated by ENL staff, guidance counselor, coaches, parent coordinator, and grade supervisors. Additionally, vertical articulation parent walks are given in May and June offer parents insight and opportunity to view our programs and ask any questions about the upcoming year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer language electives in our elementary school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Based on parent survey responses and numbers, at present we do not offer a dual language program at PS 94. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All teachers and staff are offered opportunities to attend professional development seminars and workshops through Division of ELLs and UFT along with local school PDs. Each month a list of offerings is given via email by DELLs and reviewed. If a PD meets the needs of our staff the ELL Coordinator requests to Principal and APs which staff should register and attend. Additionally, we held a ELL PD for the SIOP model of instruction on August 28, 29, &30 OF 2017. We also plan on giving PDs as we did in past using UFT TC Coach ELL specialist Maria Elena on ENL Awareness for all our staff regarding compliance and instructional needs. ELL personell also attended PDs offered by Fordham - Literacy Institute for Newcomers Jan./Feb. 2018 and Vocabulary Instruction for ELLs in December of 2017. For the upcoming 2018-2019 school year we look forward to offer staff PD opportunities from Fordham and others. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our teachers will continue ENL Awareness PD with Maria Elena from UFT. During the Monday PD time there would be a rotation schedule to accomodate all staff classroom and out of classroom teachers K-5. Agendas/sign in sheets provided before each Monday meeting. Also summer SIOP trainings/PD offered in August 28th, 29th & 30th at 10x094 from a DELLS representative. PDs that are offered through DELLS or Fordham are shared with staff through ENL Coordinator to attend and currently ENL/Bilingual teachers are registered to attend upcoming workshops from NYS/NYC RBE-RN at Fordham on a rotational schedule. Staff attended this past school year PD offerings from Fordham in Dec., Jan., and February 2017-2018 based on needs of ELLS - literacy for newcomers and vocabulary instruction. In February 2018 our school 3-5 ENL and Bilingual teachers were part of the LitLife Grant - Super Reader PD Pathway and look forward to more upcoming opportunities in 2018-2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 147  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school provides annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs during our Tuesday afternoons to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. Interpretation is provided by school staff as needed. For our annual individual meetings with ELL parents we will keep a phone log for accountability as well as create and keep attendance sheets and meeting agendas which document all conferences. Our guidance counselor, AP and/or parent coordinator provide informational meetings about middle schools to parents and students in English and their home language as needed on a continual basis informally and formally. Individual meetings and conferences are also provided to assist with applications and clarify any questions/concerns they may have in transitioning their child to middle school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school website has monthly calendars listing all workshops and meetings. The calendar is translated as well. Workshops are developed based on parent surveys. The parent coordinator facilitates these workshops which include parent volunteers. Currently, we have parent volunteers who mentor to selected students and assist them in their academic areas to boost their confidence and performance. Our parents of ELLs are also invited to attend our Title III workshops given by our Parent Coordinator based on parent suggestion and needs to support their children on ongoing monthly basis. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 148 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Diane Daprocida, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 149  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 94 Kings College School School DBN: 10x094 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Diane DaProcida Title Principal Keicha Bolden Assistant Principal Miriam Seminario Parent Coordinator Rosalee Choniuk ENL/Bilingual Teacher Ms. Rahaman Parent Sonia Vazquez -TECH & Data Teacher/Subject Area na Teacher/Subject Area Aleris Quinones Deirdre Kehayas Coach Coach Maria Joyce School Counselor Maribel Hulla NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member na Susan Caico Other ENL Teacher NA NA Other na Other na Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/18/2018 06/18/2018 06/18/2018 06/18/2018 06/18/2018 06/18/2018 06/18/2018 06/18/2018 06/18/2018 na 06/18/2018 na 2018-19 SCEP-FF 150  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X094 School Name: Kings College School Superintendent: Maribel Hulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Miriam Seminario Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. For our parents Primary language is determined using the DOE Language Assessment Form. The information is entered into ATS. When parents are contacted, we ask either in writing or verbally if parents need language translation assistance. This information is shared with the administration, classroom teacher, guidance and the parent coordinator via memo, email and verbally as the need arises. Language translation needs are met for the majority of our Other than English Language Speakers. As our data indicates, we provide parent communications translated primarily in Spanish and Bengali covered by our in-house staff. The other languages are provided upon need using the Language Line number and provided to staff in beginning of year at faculty conference so they can speak to all parents regardless of preferred language. Our translated communications are sent home with our ELL population. These communications cover the areas of school activities related to ELLs, written and oral translations provided during parent meetings, orientations, workshops and other outside training offered through DELLS, DOE and UFT. Our language information is gathered from Part III of HLIS, ATS reports, Student Emergency Contact cards and Parents Preferred Language Form. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 151  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ARAUCANIAN AFRIKAANS AMHARIC (AKA ETHIOPIAN) ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI CHINESE ANY FRENCH FULANI GUJARTI HINDI ENGLISH PUNJABI SOMALI SPANISH URDU na na 0 0 1 2 30 69 4 4 0 2 2 908 1 1 547 6 na 0 0 0.06 0.13 1.9 4.38 0.25 0.25 0 0.13 0.13 57.58 0.06 0.06 34.69 0.38 na na na 1 1 0 3 29 74 4 3 1 3 2 885 1 1 561 8 na na 0.06 0.06 0 0.19 1.84 4.69 0.25 0.19 0.06 0.19 0.13 56.12 0.06 0.06 35.57 0.51 na na 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. At this time, we do not have any population of at least 10% of a specific language (excluding the above languages). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 152  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families School Calendars Monthly Sept-June ELL letters Sept-June IEP notices Sept-June School events/celebrations Sept-June How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 153  Parent workshops Sept-June Parent Handbook Sept-Oct Discipline code Sept-Oct Parents Bill of Rights Sept-Oct However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE 2018-19 SCEP-FF 154  PBIS Initiative Sept-Oct ELL continuation/placement Sept-Oct Meet & Greet Sept-Oct Parent Teacher Conf Sept-Oct templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 155  Title I & Title III Afterschool Sept-Oct Middle School Info Jan-Feb 5th grade events Jan-Feb State Exam info Jan-Feb translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 156  PID Letters Jan-Feb End of Year Events April-May PTC April-May Trips April-May State Exam info April-May When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 157  Orientations April-May Assemblies/Celebrations However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. When possible we utilize in-house staff to translate documents. However, if needed and another language preferred certain documents available DOE templates utilized from DOE intranet. If it is not a DOE language, we use a DOE vendor to translate when needed. If appropriate language line also used to inform parent of an event. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Meet and Greet/Parent Teacher conference Registration/ELL Parent Orientation plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have readily available staff to interpret for our parents when needed in our dominant languages, Spanish and Bengali. Otherwise we use the DOE Intranet and Language Line as needed. Sept. 13, 2017 Nov. 15/16, 2017 2018-19 SCEP-FF 158  IEP meetings Student concern/progress meetings/Tuesdays Assemblies/celebrations Kindergarten Open House Ongoing informal interactions via phone or letter March 14/15, 2018 May 23, 2018 monthly -as needed and March 2018 to current incoming Kinder as needed as needed ongoing as needed last week May, first week June 2018-19 SCEP-FF 159  Conducted throughout the the year by guidance counselor, classroom teacher, ENL staff, and out of classroom staff. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Telephone system with staff available to translate in needed language or Language Line. As well as written postings placed outside and within school that are visible. Classroom teachers receive the 1 -800- Language Line number during first staff faculty conference in September within Handbook. As well as the Translation Hotline number 855-249-9103 included on daily morning memo for all staff. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September first week on Staff Development day all Staff attend a Faculty conference. Chancellors Regulations are given out and discussed. Also all information posted on PS 94 website as well as various links to support staff. On September 11, 2017 within the handbook all Staff given the number with explanation of when/how to use translation 2018-19 SCEP-FF 160  service to access the many languages along with Language Line as well as Parent Coordinators room and number if need additional support. Teachers also directed to reread all material and return signed acknowledgement. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We follow all DOE Mandates regarding parent notification requirements for translation interpretation services. The above checklist is done as per the Chancellor's Regulations translated and posted at/near main entrances, security desk, main office and Parent Coordinator office. In addition parents and staff given number Language Line and interpretation services for additional support in their language sent out. The Parent Coordinator office stationed near Main Office where parents reach out if need support/assistance. Also Parent Coordinator and volunteers post signage around school in parents preferred language. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our parent coordinator reaches out to our school's parents needs as needed in their preferred language orally and/or written using Language Line or Translation services. We also analyze the feedback from our parents based on annual surveys and respond accordingly providing workshops of interest or as they request. All our staff know that they can reach out to our Main Office or Parent Coordinator Office to set up phone translation and/or they do this through their grade level Assistant Principals. Coordinator will consider scheduling a focus group of parents of all cultures to gather feedback and best practices on communication. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 161 
