2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X098 School Name: J.H.S. 098 HERMAN RIDDER Principal: MARK TURCOTTE 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Herman Ridder I.S. 98 321200010098 6,7,8 School Number (DBN): 12X098 1619 Boston Rd., Bronx, NY, 10460 (718) 589-8200 718) 589-8179 Phone Number: Mark Turcotte Fax: mturcotte@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Mark Turcotte Vonda Lawrence Jenny Sanchez Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Vonda Lawrence BalbinaVazquez x x Greg Jenkins District Information Geographical District: 12 Jaqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Rd., Bronx, NY, 10460 Superintendent’s Office Address: jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 328-2310 Phone Number: (718) 542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Mark Turcotte Vonda Lawrence Jenny Sanchez Sara Lebreault Balbina Vasquez Greg Jenkins Nieves Maldonado *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/PTA Treasurer 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tamasa Nieto Member/PTA Secretary Maria Solomon Lynette Wesley Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Assistant Principal Member/ Teacher Member/UFT Paraprofessional Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Junior High School 98 is to challenge all students to become active participants in their own learning and the broader learning community. Through rigorous instruction students will develop the skills necessary to find success within high academic standards. By targeting student need, developing the craft of our teachers, and actively involving parents in the process, we expect that our students will become independent lifelong learners. To guide us in our mission we have developed an Advanced Literacy Vision: We envisage that all our diverse learners view literacy as a currency. They take ownership for their learning, and they are self-aware and deliberate about challenging themselves and listening to others while making their own thinking visible when accessing high quality core curriculum and content. Students and teachers are able to articulate their rationale for the “what”, the “how”, and the “why” of the learning, and they understand that these skills are transferable across content areas. This vision has enabled us to develop clear Instructional Foci: “the What” -Academic Language (Hallmark 2) -Essential Content Vocabulary (Hallmark 4) -Questioning and Discussions to build language, knowledge, and rigor (Hallmark 2) -Strategic assessment to track progress to inform instruction - Sustained opportunities for students to engage with grade level texts (Hallmark 1) -Volume of extended writing student work products (Hallmark 3) “the How” -Use of Balanced Literacy framework -Use of the workshop model “I do, we do, you do” for Readers’ and Writers’ Workshop (Hallmark 5) -Strategic Feedback/Conferencing (Hallmark 5) -Alignment of Learning Target, Task, and Assessment -Access to variety of grade level texts with appropriate scaffolds (Hallmark 1) “the Why” -Proficiency for all students (inclusive of ELLs and SWDs) -Celebrate bi-literacy 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  -Advanced Literacies for all…skills and competencies that enable communication, spoken and written, in increasingly diverse ways with increasingly diverse audiences. Theory of Action If…we recognize that our diverse learners have been historically underserved and we agree to engage in the deeper professional work of strengthening the instructional core while engaging in Professional Learning Communities that foster collaboration, engage in inquiry, and build capacity through distributive leadership…then… we can expect greater schoolwide coherence, equity for all, and improved student outcomes. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. This year we will continue our work with the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI). School leaders collaborate with our MSQI Literacy Coach and Generation Ready consultants. To support CCLS Literacy across the content areas we continue to work with content teams and individual teachers to support them with using school wide reading and writing protocols. In our work around data screening and monitoring we have developed assessment calendars and built systems and structures for administering the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) reading assessment, and secondary screeners and analyzing the data. We continue our work around teacher teaming where we further develop systems and structures that support teacher teaming and the analysis of student work within those teams to identify student needs to be addressed through adjustments in instruction. Specifically, we are enhancing literacy aligned school wide rubrics across all content areas by strengthening the feedback loop through conferencing and use of 'post-it' feedback to provide timely actionable next steps to students. We have developed protocols for examining student work and modelled those protocols to teacher teams, and increased accountability through improved monitoring of teacher team meetings. Around strategic reading supports we are emerging with the development of grouping models to support different learners in the classroom. Strategic targeted intervention periods have been scheduled into the school day to ensure targeted instruction. Our efforts have been centered on creating a program with an opportunity for grade level teams to target groups of students, therefore increasing direct instruction and targeted intervention periods. Tiered reading intervention periods for all students have been introduced Fridays adding two periods of dedicated strategic reading through targeted interventions: Wilson (Tier III), Just Words (Tier II), i-Ready (Tier II), content reading and writing. Teachers will be provided with ongoing professional development around sound literacy practices that support good teaching and learning. We will continue our work with Teaching Matters consultants in the further development and modification of the new ELA genre writing curriculum Writing Matters. Teacher teams are being further developed to support this work and engage in inquiry cycles to further drive the school’s efforts around reading and writing growth. Monday afternoons are used for differentiated professional learning as well as unit/lesson design by ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science PLCs. Math, ELA, Social Studies, Science, and ENL PLCs meet weekly during common planning periods. Professional learning has focused on:  Academic language  Rigor and beliefs as to how our students learn best  Assessing the quality of published student work  Questioning and Discussion Techniques  Effective practices for teacher teams   Using a strategic assessment plan to track student progress and inform instruction  Rigor through pre-planned questions Inquiry work 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12   Modeling what good readers do– “Think-aloud/Read-aloud”  Workshop Model - “I do, We do, You do.”  Teaching Matters Writing Program – grade level genre writing  Assessment during instruction    Use of reading and writing protocols Feedback and Conferencing Lesson planning – connecting task to standards An extension of our literacy work with MSQI revolves around family engagement efforts. Through collaboration between multiple DOE offices and external stakeholders, our school was once again selected to participate in the Academic Parent Teacher Teams (APTT) cohort for the 2018-2019 school year. The Office of Community Schools in support of the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) have been piloting West Ed’s APTT classroom-based, teacher-led, data-driven family engagement model. APTT is a systematic and integrated approach to parent-teacher collaboration. Its design is rooted in training families to support children’s academic goals by linking home and school learning. This will be our 4th year using the APTT model. Our school continues to develop ways to create meaningful partnerships and establish a systematic approach to family engagement that gives all families the information, skills, and confidence they need to support grade-level learning goals at home. Our team continues to be provided with expert guidance, opportunities for capacity building, and practice in the area of family engagement. In 2015-2016 we piloted the program with our 6th grade and invited families to participate in three 75-minute team meetings (all families were present) and one 30-minute individual session (the student, the teacher, and the student’s family). During the 2016-17 school year and again in the 2017-18 school year, we took the model school wide through 6th, 7th, and 8th grade. We will continue to replicate this school wide model again for the 2018-2019 school year. During APTT meetings, teachers share student performance data that are actionable, review grade-level foundational skills, and demonstrate concrete activities that families can do at home to help students master those skills. Our families practice the activities with other families in the class, and each family sets 60-day academic goals for their student. When families attend APTT meetings, they go home feeling informed, clear about their role, and committed to improving their child’s learning outcomes. Through teacher coaching and mentoring, families improve their ability to be genuine partners for academic success. To support our efforts in teacher development we are involved in New Teacher Center (NTC) mentoring initiative: Instructional Mentoring, New Teacher Mentoring, and Teacher Development. Our district continues to participate in the New Teacher Center Instructional Mentoring program for a third year. The goal of this initiative is to improve teaching practice and student learning. The year-long Professional Learning Series (PLS) involves a series of professional development for mentors and school leadership which strengthens teacher effectiveness through a sequenced curriculum centered on selected Formative Assessment and Support (FAS) system tools and protocols. The series is building a strong  and committed community of skilled mentors/coaches, prepared to advance teaching practice and impact student achievement. In our school we are working with the curriculum to promote skills of observation, classroom data collection, and data analysis. Our work is ongoing and aimed at building capacity for developing and retaining new teachers and the teacher leaders and assistant principals that coach them. This school year we have nine teachers in their first or second year of teaching that will be supported by a mentor. This year, in an effort to build capacity, we have introduced the role of Peer Collaborative Teacher Leader. With support from the district we envision that this individual will also work to improve teacher craft and effectiveness. This teacher leader's classroom will serve as a lab site and model for classroom environment. This teacher leader will work in a formal capacity to model instruction through strategic inter-visitations, as well participating in instructional rounds in order to provide targeted supports. As a key member of the instructional team, this individual will assist in the development of consistency across PLC teacher teams by helping to establish team goals, processes, and norms. We continue to improve the culture and climate of our school through our work in Special Program – Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS). This is a Social/Emotional Initiative. PBIS Universal/Tier I supports are focused on the quality of the school day experience for all members of the learning community. School-wide 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  expectations are developed and supported by the PBIS team consisting of staff and students. Life Space Crisis Intervention (LSCI) Tier II/III supports are available for students who need extra supports to find success in school. Several crisis team staff members (teachers and school leaders) have been trained and certified in LSCI counseling supports. This year we will also be piloting the Restorative Justice model as we currently have five teachers who are trained and are conducting circles with their classes as a means to support students' social and emotional learning by improving culture and climate through building healthy classroom communities. Through funding provided through grants from the Department of Youth and Community Development, NYC (DYCD) and Empire, NYS we will continue to develop strategic collaborations with community based organization NY Edge (formerly Sports and Arts in the Schools Foundation) to help us with this work. Through the After School Academy at J.H.S. 98 we are able to implement targeted intervention programs and strategies to address the needs of our overage students; our students who are struggling and in need of additional time on task (including English Language Learners and students with disabilities); students that are reading two or more grade levels below current grade; students that are producing writing samples that are two or more years below current grade. We have developed a program that best supports students by using: Supplemental reading/literacy instruction with the i-Ready program for all Tier II students Supplemental math instruction/practice with the i-Ready program for all Tier II students    Hands-on mathematics projects and extensions within the common core aligned CMP3 Math curriculum  Hands-on English Language Arts projects and extensions within the common core aligned ELA curriculum Writting Matters  Direct ENL instruction and extensions within the common core aligned ELA and Math curriculum  Hands-on Technology and Arts projects and extensions within the common core aligned ELA and Math curriculum  Music, Art, Technology enrichment classes   Parent engagement activities and workshops Sports and Dance enrichment classes Special Program – Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) Reading Initiative: MSQI literacy consultant, Word Generation vocabulary acquisition, universal rubrics Targeted Interventions: Wilson (Tier III),i-Ready (Tier II), Wilson Just Words (Tier II) Special Program – New Teacher Center (NTC) Mentoring Initiative: Instructional Mentoring, New Teacher Mentoring, and Teacher Development Special Program – Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) Social/Emotional Initiative: PBIS Universal/Tier I supports, Life Space Crisis Intervention (LSCI) Tier II/III supports Special Populations – ELLs in monolingual general education setting, ELLs in Spanish Language Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) setting, SWDs in special class, ICT setting, SETSS 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  At JHS 98 we work to support all of our students with an increased focus on our special populations – English Language Learners (ELLs) in monolingual general education settings, English Language Learners (ELLs) in a Spanish language transitional bilingual education setting, and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) in special classes, ICT settings, and those receiving SETSS supports. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our key areas of focus for this year, and the goals embedded in this CEP are driven by our 2016-2017 Quality Review (QR) and 2017-2018 Principal Performance Overview (PPO) outlined as follows: QR area of celebration - 3.4 Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families. Provide supports to advance those expectations. PPO area of celebration - 1.3 Well aligned strategic organizational decisions lead to effective teacher assignments, maximized teaching schedules, collaborative planning time, and investing in teacher practice. PPO area of celebration - 1.4 Leadership supports the implementation of comprehensive strategies that promote a safe climate and the personal and academic growth of students. Leadership models and guides the school community towards a culture of respect and trust through interactions with students and staff. PPO area of celebration - 4.1 Well developed system to ensure that teachers are receiving effective feedback with clear next steps. QR and PPO area of focus - 1.2 Effective teaching strategies are uneven across most classrooms. Consequently, all students, including ELLs and SWDs are not yet receiving the level of instruction that is consistently cognitively challenging and promotes high levels of student engagement. Teacher practice across classrooms inconsistently provides all learners, including ELLs and SWDs with opportunities to engage in rich discussions and produce meaningful work products. QR and PPO area of focus - 2.2 Use of assessments that are not always fully aligned to standards hinders teacher and students’ accurate understanding of progress toward achievement. Therefore, teachers inconsistently identify all learners’ common learning challenges and students are not fully aware of their next learning steps. Formative assessments do not always provide a clear portrait of student mastery, hindering the development of effective instructional adjustments in some classes. Across classrooms, teachers’ assessment practices inconsistently reflect the use of ongoing checks for understanding and student self-assessment so that teachers make effective adjustments to meet students’ learning needs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X098 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 240 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 29 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 18 11 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 92.9% % Reduced Lunch 29.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 67.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 5% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 17.4% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 13 13 88.3% 2.1% 21.3% 27.1% 3.3% 0.8% 4 33% 4.8 11.3% 34% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X . . X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2016-2017 Quality Review and 2017-2018 PPO indicated a need for coherence of instructional shifts across grades and content areas. As such, teachers need to strengthen the link between their learning targets and tasks. While the school has made gains in engaging students in challenging texts while promoting evidence in argument within peer to peer discussion utilizing accountable talk as part of the instructional focus, this has yet to transfer to stronger writing across the content areas. End of year MOSL data indicates that while many students made impressive gains from BOY to EOY NYC Performance Tasks this did not translate to gains in student outcome in state exams. To address our areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year (QR 1.2 - Instruction that is consistently cognitively challenging and promotes high levels of student engagement. QR 2.2 - Use of assessments that are fully aligned to standards maximizing teacher and students’ accurate understanding of progress toward achievement) we will put in place the systems and structures that will enable teachers to implement writing units with a special focus on Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English Language Learners (ELLs). We will ensure SWDs and ELLs access to rigorous curriculum and opportunities to engage with leveled and challenging text, instructing them in the writing process (Writting Matters), and developing an assessment system that allows for transparency of progress and needs. This speaks to the Multidimensional Performance Rubric (MPPR) Domain 2 - School Culture and Instructional Program. Specifically, in the dimension of Culture under the practice statement of part a. in which the school leader supports various teaming opportunities, common planning and inquiry time, and visitations within the organization to increase learning and improve practice. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, JHS 98, as having implemented the Writing Matters genre writing units of study from theTeaching Matters writing program to improve the writing skills of ELLs and SWDs with improved strategic monitoring by school leadership, we will see student gain as measured by a 5% increase in student outcomes on the 2018 New York State (NYS) ELA and Math Assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Special Education and ELLs departments will be departmentalized by content area with the most qualified teachers aligned to appropriate subject. Since several of the SWDs at J.H.S. 98 are also ELLs , Special Education and ELL teachers will be meet in tandem on a bi-weekly basis to share best practices and analyze student work to adjust instruction based on student need. SWDs, ELLs Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School Leaders, ELA, Math, SPED, ESL/BIL teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches, PPC/Child Study Teams During school day-September 2018 through June 2019, After school instruction – September 2018 – June 2019 Academic Intervention Services (AIS) for all SWDs and ELLs. AIS will be provided by the content area teacher through small-group targeted Tier II/III periods and one-to-one instruction during school hours, and for participating students during After School Academy we will see gains of 18 months to 2 years writing ability for 80% of SWDs and ELLs as measured by Writing Matters checklists and rubrics that will lead to at least two pieces of grade level genre writing from sources per instructional unit Professional Learning (PL) will be provided to teachers in-house and/or outside the school on the following topics: analysis and use of student data to plan and set goals, examining student work products, CCLS in ELA and Math, Universal Design for Learning (UDL), strategies for ELLs instruction, strategies for SWD instruction, effective models of co-teaching, curriculum mapping, Writting Matters curriculum, CMP3 curriculum, Passport to Social Studies curriculum, Danielson's Framework for Teaching; MSQI literacy practices. School Leaders, ELA, SPED, ESL/BIL teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches, PPC/Child Study Teams Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads/Coaches, Mentors, Consultants, teachers, district field support SWDs, ELLs On-going beginning September 2018 SWDs, ELLs On-going beginning September 2018 Throughout the school year staff will utilize both weekly Professional Learning time and Teacher Team PLC sessions to examine student work 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  products to adjust instruction and give actionable feedback to students, turnkey and share professional learning and best practices within Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, key instructional shifts, Special Education Reform, CR Part 154 for ELLs, and the school’s instructional focus . Ongoing analysis and use of student formative and summative assessment data to plan and set goals. On a regular basis, teachers will examine student work using the New Teacher Center's (NTC) "Analysis of Student Work” protocol to understand the steps needed to assist students attaining the level of performance that the Common Core demands and to continue the cycle of inquiry. Examination of Writing Matters writing units formative writing process drafts, summative mid unit and end of unit writing pieces, bench mark assessment results, and unit assessments will be used to drive this work. School Leaders, ELA, Math, SPED/ESL/BIL teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches, Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC)/Child Study Teams , Teacher Teams/Professional Learning Communities SWDs, ELLs On-going beginning September 2018 Throughout the school year staff will utilize Special Education and ELL departmental meetings, bi-weekly grade level meetings and weekly Teacher Team PLC sessions to engage in this work 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Parent Involvement initiative - Support and train 3 -5 family delegates from last year's 6th grade team to invite families to participate in three 75-minute team meetings (all families are present) and one 30-minute individual session (the student, the teacher, and the student’s family). During Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) meetings teachers share student performance data (Reading Comprehension levels) that are actionable, review grade-level foundational skills, and demonstrate concrete activities that families can do at home to help students master those skills. Our families practice the activities with other families in the class, and each family sets 60-day academic goals for their student. We will schedule a Family Focus Group after APTT 3, and personally invite 15 – 20 families who we identified as having attended all 3 APTT meetings to participate in the focus group to evaluate our effectiveness. Parents, Students Parent Coordinator, grade teacher teams, Instructional Coach, Administrators APPT Intro Family Night Thursday, September 20, 2018 5:00-7:00 PM APTT meeting #1 Tuesday, November 27, 2018 12:30-3:30PM Tuesday, November 27, 2018 5:00-8:00PM APTT meeting #2 Tuesday, March 26, 2019 12:30-3:30PM Tuesday, March 26, 2018 5:00-8:00PM 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Parent Involvement Initiative - Academic Parent Teacher Teams (APTT) Teacher Planning Sessions. During Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) on dates identified with the APTT Implementation Planning , grade teams will meet to plan for the parent involvement meetings as described in activity above. Teachers APTT meeting #3 Thursday May 16, 2019 5:00-8:00PM APTT Individual Parent Meetings scheduled on a rolling basis by the Grade Teams to take place on Parent Engagement Tuesdays from 2:20 – 3:35 pm weekly. Teacher Training sessions Tuesday, September 4 10:30 am-12:00 pm;Tuesday, October 16 8:00 am-3:35 School Leaders, ELA, Math, SPED, ESL/BIL teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  . pm; Tuesday, February 12 8:00 am-3:35 pm . . . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement initiative - the Parent Coordinator will continue to plan parent engagement activates that welcome all families into the school community, improve communication, support student success, advocate for students, share power,and collaborate with the community. Additionally, we will support and train 3 -5 family delegates from last year's 6th grade team to invite families to participate in three 75-minute team meetings (all families are present) and one 30-minute individual session (the student, the teacher, and the student’s family). During Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) meetings teachers share student performance data (Reading Comprehension levels) that are actionable, review grade-level foundational skills, and demonstrate concrete activities that families can do at home to help students master those skills. Our families practice the activities with other families in the class, and each family sets 60-day academic goals for their student. We will schedule a Family Focus Group after APTT 3, and personally invite 15 – 20 families who we identified as having attended all 3 APTT meetings to participate in the focus group to evaluate our effectiveness. See action plan Part 3a. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Collaborative Team Teaching (CTT) and Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) staff on teacher line. Special Education program departmentalized. 2. NYSESLAT test prep materials and online reading and math intervention resources (Read 180, iReady ELA, iReady Math, Imagine Learning bilingual math) will be financed through OTPS and Tax Levy NYSTL. Additionally, after school program funded through DYCD and Title III funding. 3. Title I funds and MOSL will be used for coverage for teachers who will attend professional development workshop during school hours. 4. Departmental and grade level Inquiry Teams meet one day each weekly, as well as using 'other professional work' time on Monday and Tuesday afternoons when appropriate. There are no additional costs for these actions. Special Education Liaison trains staff in the use of SESIS and individualized goals of SWDs during daily planning sessions and weekly Monday PD from 2:20-3:40, on established dates as per Professional Learning plan. ELL Point trains staff in the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  use of ENL strategies and individualized goals of Transitional Bilingual and ELLs in monolingual settings during weekly planning sessions, and weekly Monday PD from 2:20-3:40, on established dates as per Professional Learning plan. There is no additional cost associated with this action. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Administer BOY NYCPT ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies - September 2018, with an expected gain of 1 level for 50% of students compared to the fall benchmark, Administer NYS ELA Common Core Test – March 2019, Administer NYS Math Common Core Test - May 2019, Administer EOY NYCPT ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies - May/June 2019. 2. Administer NYC ELA and Math Fall Benchmark – January 2019, Administer NYC ELA and Math Spring Benchmark – March 2019 (as mid-point assessments) with an expected gain of 1 level for 50% of students compared to the fall baseline. 3. Create 4-6 week intervention plans to target specific Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC) identified student needs, set target of 80% student growth in that area, evaluate gains 4. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in outside professional development activities that they then turnkey to their professional learning communities within the school as per the Professional Learning plan. 5. Administration will conduct an analysis of the results of the internal assessments as compared to the external assessments to evaluate the alignment of assessment data with a target of no more than 10% deviation in the scoring alignment. 6. Administer two culminating writing tasks/assessments per unit of study, per content area throughout the school year with an expected gain of 18 months to 2 year writing growth for 80% of students compared to the September 2018 baseline Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. To assess student progress we will use the NYCPTs, benchmark assessments, summative and formative assessments and the data resulting from utilizing the New Teacher Center's analyzing student work protocol. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X . . . SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We will continue to improve on 2016-2017 Quality Review (QR) of rating “Developing” in 3.4 HIGH EXPECTATIONS by expanding Universal/Tier I systems and structures to include Tier II/III interventions (both Behavioral and Academic). 2016-2017 Quality review and 2017-2018 PPO indicated a need for coherence of instructional shifts across grades and content areas. As such, teachers need to strengthen the link between their learning targets and tasks. While the school has made gains in engaging students in challenging texts while promoting evidence in argument within peer to peer discussion utilizing accountable talk as part of the instructional focus, this has yet to transfer to improved reading gains for all students. End of year Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) reading data indicates that while 92% of our 6th graders made gains in reading growth our top tier students did not gain. At risk students showed loss, not gains. To further our culture of high expectations and to address our areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year (QR 1.2 - Instruction that is consistently cognitively challenging and promotes high levels of student engagement. QR - 2.2 Use of assessments that are fully aligned to standards maximizing teacher and students’ accurate understanding of progress toward achievement) we will put in place the systems and structures that will best leverage the raising of reading levels with a special focus on Students with Disabilities (SWDs) and English Language Learners (ELLs). We will ensure ELLs and SWDs access to rigorous curriculum and opportunities to engage with leveled and challenging text, while developing an assessment system that allows for transparency of progress and need. We believe there is no greater support for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  social/emotional growth than by having high expectations for ALL students. As such there is no greater priority for us than to help our students towards reading at grade level. This is most true of our ELLs and SWDs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019 we will see reading growth of 18 months to 2 years for 80% of ELLs and SWDs as measured by the End of Year ( EOY ) Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment. Through improved monitoring by leadership this will establish a classroom and school culture where students become independent readers, feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers, transferring into student gain as measured by a 5% increase in student outcomes on the 2018 New York State (NYS) ELA and Math Assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide Advisory periods (social/emotional) and/or Academic Intervention Services (AIS) for all students who did not achieve proficiency (including SWDs and ELLs) during school hours through, programmed Reading Block, one to one tutoring, After School Academy. Through targeted reading intervention (i-Ready, Wilson, and Wilson Just Words) we expect to see 18 months to 2 years reading growth for 80% of ELLs and SWDs. Additionally, during the intervention periods our high achieving students will be provided enrichment in ELA and Math. Create Response to Intervention (RtI) plans for those students who are holdovers from 2017-2018, attended summer school for ELA or Math, and those at risk of failing ELA or Math in the 2018-2019 school year. RtI plans will address student academic and social needs that have been identified as an obstacle to student success. Professional Learning (PL) will be provided to teachers and paraprofessionals in-house and/or outside the school on the following topics: analysis and use of student data to plan and set goals, looking at student work, CCLS in ELA, Math, Social Studies, and Science, Universal Design for Learning (UDL), curriculum mapping, Framework for Great Schools, Writting Matters, CMP3 curriculum, Passport to Social Studies curriculum, Danielson's Framework for Teaching, MSQI literacy practices, essential content and academic vocabulary acquisition, and Writing Matters writing units. Professional development will be differentiated in order to connect the teachers and paraprofessionals with the appropriate support. Lowest 1/3, Hold Overs, Over Age, High Achievers, SWDs, ELLs Lowest 1/3, Hold Overs, Over Age, High Achievers, SWDs, ELLs Lowest 1/3, Hold Overs, Over Age, High Achievers, SWDs, ELLs During school day-September 2018 through June 2019, After school instruction – October 2018 – May 2019 On-going beginning September 2018 On-going beginning September 2018 Throughout the school year staff will utilize both weekly grade level meetings and Teacher Team Planning Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School Leaders, ELA and Math teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches, PPC/Child Study Teams School Leaders, ELA and Math teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches, Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC), Parents/guardians Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Leads/Coaches, Mentors, Consultants, teachers, district field support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Teachers will engage in a professional learning cycle that includes ongoing analysis and use of student formative and summative assessment data to plan and set goals. On a regular basis, teachers will examine student work using the New Teacher Center (NTC) "Analysis of Student Work” protocol to understand the steps needed to assist them attaining the level of performance that the Common Core demands and to continue the cycle of inquiry. DRP reading assessments will be utilized as a baseline to group, develop goals and provide the appropriate instruction and again throughout the year to target student needs and to measure reading growth. iReady reading, Wilson Just Words, and Imagine Learning reading interventions provide teacher reports on student progress. This information can be used in real time to inform teachers for student grouping purposes and the modification of instruction. Lowest 1/3, Hold Overs, Over Age, High Achievers, SWDs, ELLs Parents, Students Support and train 3 -5 family delegates from last year's 6th grade team to invite families to participate in three 75-minute team meetings (all families are present) and one 30-minute individual session (the student, the teacher, and the student’s family). During Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) meetings teachers share student performance data (Reading Comprehension levels) that are actionable, review grade-level foundational skills, and demonstrate concrete activities that families can do at home to help students master those skills. Our families will practice the activities with other families in the class, and each family sets 60-day academic goals for their student. sessions to analyze student work/data, turnkey and share professional learning and best practices within Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, key instructional shifts and the school’s instructional focus . On-going beginning September 2018 Throughout the school year staff will utilize both weekly grade level meetings and Teacher Team Planning sessions to engage in this work September 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, ELA and Math teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches, Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC)/Child Study Teams , Teacher Teams/Professional Learning Communities Parent Coordinator, grade teacher teams, Instructional Coach, Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement initiative - the Parent Coordinator will continue to plan parent engagement activates that welcome that welcome all families into the school community, improve communication, support student success, advocate for students, share power,and collaborate with the community. Additionally, we will support and train 3 -5 family delegates from last year's 6th grade team to invite families to participate in three 75-minute team meetings (all families are present) and one 30-minute individual session (the student, the teacher, and the student’s family). During Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) meetings teachers share student performance data (Reading Comprehension levels) that are actionable, review grade-level foundational skills, and demonstrate concrete activities that families can do at home to help students master those skills. Our families practice the activities with other families in the class, and each family sets 60-day academic goals for their student. We will schedule a Family Focus Group after APTT 3, and personally invite 15 – 20 families who we identified as having attended all 3 APTT meetings to participate in the focus group to evaluate our effectiveness. See action plan Part 3a. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. ELA and Math teachers, AIS and SHSAT tutor volunteers. Intervention materials and resources (Read 180, iReady, Imagine Learning) will be financed through OTPS and Tax Levy NYSTL. Additionally, after school programs funded through DYCD grant, Achieve Now grant, MSQI grant, and Title III funding. 3. Title I, CIE, and MOSL funds will be used for coverage for teacher who will attend professional development workshop during school hours. 4. Instructional Cabinet meet with the administration daily. Departmental and grade level Inquiry Teams meet once weekly each. There are no additional costs for these actions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Administer NYC Math Pre-Assessment Baseline– September 2018, Administer BOY NYCPTs in ELA, Math, Scienece, and Social Studies - September 2018, Administer NYS ELA and Math Common Core Tests – April 2019, Administer EOY NYCPT ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies - May/June 2019. 2. Administer NYC ELA and Math Fall Benchmark – January 2019 Administer NYC ELA and Math Spring Benchmark – March 2019 (as mid point assessments) with an expected gain of 1 level for 50% of students compared to the fall baseline. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  3. Create 4-6 week intervention plans to target specific PPC identified student needs, set target of 80% student growth in that area, evaluate gains 4. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in outside professional development activities that they then turnkey to their professional learning communities within the school 5. Administration will conduct an analysis of the results of the internal assessments as compared to the external assessments to evaluate the alignment of assessment data with a target of no more than 10% deviation in the scoring alignment 6. Administer DRP reading baseline September 2018, Administer DRP secondary assessment to identify areas of gains and of need, Administer Spring DRP summative assessment with an expected gain of 18 months to 2 year reading growth for 50% of students compared to the September 2017 baseline Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Math baseline, BOY NYCPTs in ELA, Math, Scienece, and Social Studies, benchmarks assessments, DRPs, summative and formative assessments, NYS ELA and Math Common Core Tests, EOY NYCPTs in ELA, Math, Scienece, and Social Studies Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X X . 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. . 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teachers have a greater impact on student success than any other school factor as decades of research have proven. In order to successfully implement key instructional shifts school communities must develop a shared understanding of what effective instruction looks like. Our last Quality Review (QR) 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 PPO highlighted a need to focus on QR indicator 1.2 (teacher pedagogy) and 2.2 (assessment). To support teachers as we continue to engage students with new, higher standards using the Common Core, school administrators will continue to use Danielson’s Framework for Teaching to serve as the focus for teacher development and evaluation and to provide more frequent, formative feedback around teacher craft with a special focus on component 4e. Growing and Developing Professionally, as we support teachers to grow as professionals and make maximum impact on student outcome. QR and PPO reports, observation data, and student proficiency data (Benchmarks, NYCPT, DRP, NYSESLAT, ELA and Math State Exams, interim assessments) all indicate that teachers need to meet more frequently and with tighter focus to genuinely engage in the important professional work of teacher teaming. This speaks to the Multidimensional Performance Rubric (MPPR) Domain 2 - School Culture and Instructional Program. Specifically, in the dimension of Capacity Building under the practice statement of part a. in which the school leader develops the instructional leadership capacity of the staff. Additionally, it speaks to the MPPR Domain 3 - Safe, Efficient, Effective Learning Environment. Specifically, in the dimension of Capacity Building under the practice statement of part b. in which effective school leaders develop capacity for distributed leadership by providing interested individuals with opportunities and support for assuming leadership responsibilities and roles. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have worked on a weekly basis in Professional Learning Communities/Content Teacher Teams to engage in inquiry work that drives the instructional and curricular modifications necessary for differentiated teaching and learning. The outcome is that student subgroups All, English Language Learners (ELLs) , and Students with Disabilities (SWDs) will demonstrate growth and progress towards achieving proficiency in both English Language Arts (ELA) and Mathematics as measured by a 50% increase in these subgroup scoring at Level 3 and 4 on the 2019 New York State (NYS) ELA and Math Exams. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School Leaders, teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches, Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC)/Child Study Teams, Teacher Teams/Professional Learning Communities Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? All students, sub-groups of students September, 2018 - June 30, 2019  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). To address our areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year (QR 1.2 - Instruction that is consistently cognitively challenging and promotes high levels of student engagement. QR 2.2 - Use of assessments that are fully aligned to standards maximizing teacher and students’ accurate understanding of progress toward achievement) we refine the systems and structures that will enable teachers to work effectively in teacher teams to examine data points and authentic student work for the purpose of adjusting instruction to meet the needs of their students. Using data and Teacher Team Planning (TTP) to drive instruction., teachers will participate in weekly team meetings to engage in inquiry cycles, inter-visitations, and lesson studies that explicitly focus on RIGOR as defined in Danielson’s component 3C, Engaging Students in Learning. Because of this work, students will experience gains across content areas. We will engage in 6 week Inquiry Cycles. Through the Inquiry Team process, the classroom teachers will reflect on their own instructional practices. Practices that were informed by the Inquiry Team process include, but not limited to the following:  On-going differentiated professional development workshops are provided for teachers as needed to meet the needs of individual student.  Collaboration and sharing of best practices among teachers to achieve academic goals.  Examining student work so teachers modify instructional plans to ensure opportunities for all students.  Involvement of students and families in establishing goals for learning.  Students’ awareness of their own strengths and weaknesses.  Students learn to monitor their progress based on their individual goals. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  New Teacher Center (NTC) Mentoring. Continue to develop capacity within the organization by training teacher leaders to become effective mentors. Teacher induction and retention will be addressed through coaching and professional development for new teachers and teachers with improvement plans. Instructional Leads will turnkey Professional Learning (PL) to teachers on the following topics: analysis and use of student data to plan and set goals, analyzing student work, CCLS in ELA and Math, Universal Design for Learning (UDL), strategies for ELLs instruction, strategies for SWD instruction, effective strategies for the ICT class, curriculum mapping, Framework for Great Schools, Expectations, Expeditionary Learning Curriculum, CMP3 Curriculum, Passport to Social Studies curriculum, and Danielson's Framework for Teaching; MSQI literacy practices, “Word Generation” essential content and academic vocabulary acquisition curriculum, and Teacher College writing units New teachers (1-3 years) July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019 All students September , 2018 - June 30, 2019 Ongoing analysis and use of student formative and summative assessment data to plan and set goals. On regular basis, teachers will examine assessment data and student work using the NTC "Analysis of Student Work” protocol to understand the steps needed to assist them attaining the level of performance that the Common Core demands and to continue the cycle of inquiry. All students, September , 2018 Sub groups of students - June 30, 2019 School leaders, Teacher Mentors, Teachers, District 12 Support, NTC Support Staff Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Leads/Coaches, Mentors, Consultants, teachers, district field support School Leaders, ELA, Math, SS, SCI, SPED/ESL/BIL teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches, Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC)/Child Study Teams , Teacher Teams/Professional Learning Communities 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement initiative - the Parent Coordinator will continue to plan parent engagement activates that welcome that welcome all families into the school community, improve communication, support student success, advocate for students, share power,and collaborate with the community Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Title I, CIE, and MOSL funds will be used for coverage for teacher who will attend professional development workshop during school hours. Instructional Cabinet meet with the administration daily. There are no additional costs for these actions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  2. Whole group and differentiated small group teacher/para professional learning weekly on Mondays from 2:20-3:40 pm 3. Departmental and grade level Inquiry Teams to meet weekly on Mondays from 3:45-5:00 pm. Funded through DYCD grant, MSQI grant, and Title I funding. 4. New Teacher Center (NTC) mentoring program for incoming/new teachers. There are no additional costs for these actions as the district is covering the cost for these trainings. 5. Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Program and resources. Was funded through Chancellor's '100 Schools Initiative" and continued through MSQI grant, and Title I/Title III funding. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in outside professional development activities that they then turnkey to their professional learning communities within the school 2. Administration will conduct an analysis of the results of the internal assessments as compared to the external assessments to evaluate the alignment of assessment data with a target of no more than 10% deviation in the scoring alignment 3. By February 2019 teacher teams will have analyzed the results of the quantifiable mid-point NYC ELA and Math Spring Benchmark administered February 2019 and the NYC ELA and Math Winter Benchmark administered in December 2018 to measure our progress towards meeting annual academic goals 4. All teachers will participate in weekly teacher teaming to analyze student work to make curricula modifications that drive instruction 5. Principal will utilize a strategic approach to monitor the implementation of D12-New Teacher Center Mentoring program through weekly meeting with mentor and monitoring of log of support for teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Benchmarks, formative and summative/end of unit assessments Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X . X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strong instructional leaders have a clear vision which is used to create the architecture for the systems and structures that drive student outcome. Resources must be allocated to support a common vision of reform. To address our areas of focus, as indicated by Quality Reviews ( QR 1.1 CCLS aligned curriculum, 1.2 - Instruction that is consistently cognitively challenging and promotes high levels of student engagement. QR 2.2 - Use of assessments that are fully aligned to standards maximizing teacher and students’ accurate understanding of progress toward achievement) leadership will continue to make organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals, the use of on-going assessments and grading practices, and the analysis of student learning outcomes for the purpose of adjusting instruction. QR and PPO recognized that there is an inconsistency across classroom in assessment practices, checks for understanding, and student self-assessment, and their monitoring by leadership. The teacher-to-student feedback cycle needs to be more explicit in order to advance student learning with clear next step, just as the school leader-to-teacher does to advance teacher practice. Building teacher capacity and shared accountability remain a focus. Teacher pedagogy must further align to curricula, engage students, and meet the needs of all learners and lead to meaningful work products, contributing to a genuine feed back loop that raises student outcome.Through the observation cycle teachers' strengths are celebrated and areas of focus are matched with professional learning to strengthen teacher practice. Teacher Improvement Plans are developed and progress monitored with the goal of ensuring that the strongest teachers are in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  front of students. This speaks to MPPR Domain 1 - Shared Vision of Learning. Specifically, within the dimension of Culture practice and in service statements a. that effective leaders collaborate with key stakeholders to develop and implement a shared vision and mission for learning, b. that the vision and mission aligns with the vision and mission of the district, c. and explicitly links the vision and mission to programs and policies. Additionally, within the dimension of Sustainability practice and in service statement a. effective school leaders put a process and structure in place for organizational improvement and uses it to assess the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 100% of students will have a comprehensive portfolio of meaningful work products from each major content area, reading and writing folders of current work will be available for each student in each content area. Leadership will provide systems for teachers to track formative assessment and student learning and through improved monitoring by leadership of its use we expect a student gain as measured by a 5% increase in student outcomes in both the New York State ELA and Math Assessments for SWDs and ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) We will improve systems and structures around coherent instruction, assessment, and interventions. Continue to develop and fine-tune systems and structures that ensure teachers are receiving effective feedback with clear next steps through effective observations cycles. teachers, Instructional Leads/coaches On-going beginning September 2018 School Leaders Develop and implement a portfolio system for collecting two meaningful work products per unit across content areas that align fully to the pre-planned scope and sequence/assessment calendar of that subject. Units will be planned/mapped/developed that will lead to at least two pieces of grade level genre writing from sources per instructional unit per content area. Additionally, Math and Science will collect artifacts from investigations and labs that are aligned to a CCLS based curriculum and align fully to the pre-planned scope and sequence/assessment calendar. All work/tasks will bundled and of publishable quality. Each bundle will include a task card, standards/traits covered, teacher conferencing sheets, rubric, teacher feedback and next steps, and student reflection/self-assessment sheets. Principal Cabinet. By expanding cabinet more stakeholders can be involved in both shared decision making and shared accountability. Leadership will be able to delegate/share the burden of task that may interfere with the larger instructional work Leveled libraries will be available in every classroom. Teachers will utilize libraries to support reader's workshop, build background knowledge in content areas. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students, Teachers On-going beginning September 2018 School Leaders, Instructional Leads, Teachers Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, Instructional Leads, other Teachers Principal On-going beginning September 2018 On-going beginning September 2018 Principal, AP, coaches and instructional leads How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Parent Engagement initiative - the Parent Coordinator will continue to plan parent engagement activates that welcome that welcome all families into the school community, improve communication, support student success, advocate for students, share power,and collaborate with the community Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. There are no additional costs outside of Principal and Assistant Principal salary for this work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Principal and secondary evaluator will check portfolios on a unit by unit basis and again as part of the observation cycle to ensure that teachers and students are engaging in this practice. 2. School leaders and instructional leads will look at samples of student portfolios at the end of unit after teacher teams have met to discuss work and make adjustments to instruction and modifying the larger curriculum map. 3. Instructional leads and teachers will look at samples of student work portfolios during the unit and will make adjustments to instruction while modifying the larger curriculum map. 4. By February 2019 teacher teams will have analyzed the results of the quantifiable mid-point NYC ELA and Math Spring Benchmark administered February 2019 and the NYC ELA and Math Winter Benchmark administered in December 2018 to measure our progress towards meeting annual academic goals 5. Weekly team meetings have been overhauled through the re-programming of the school Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. weekly monitoring of student work folders, reading folders, teacher formative assessment tracking data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year the school and the Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) will continue the work of helping to bridge the home to school divide. We will focus on helping parents utilize tools to raise reading comprehension to match our supportive environment goal (raising reading rates 18 months to 2 years). Over the past three years of this work not only have we seen an increase in parental involvement and a strengthening in teacher teaming but we saw an increase in movement toward our reading goal across all grade levels. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By implementing APTT meetings across grades (school-wide) with a focus on increasing reading comprehension while partnering with parents we will further develop our effective system to improve communication between home and school leading to increased parental involvement in their children's academic life, school functions and PTA activities as 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  evidenced by results of school survey and increased attendance at PTA and school functions. By June 2019, because of these genuine parent engagement practices we can expect student gain as measured by a 5% increase in student outcomes on the 2018 New York State (NYS) ELA and Math Assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School Messenger System will be utilized to provide school community with alerts regarding important school announcements. Notices will be distributed in multiple languages to ensure access for all parents. Support and train 3 -5 family delegates from last year's 6th grade team to invite families to participate in three 75-minute team meetings (all families are present) and one 30-minute individual session (the student, the teacher, and the student’s family). During Academic Parent Teacher Team (APTT) meetings teachers share student performance data (Reading Comprehension levels) that are actionable, review grade-level foundational skills, and demonstrate concrete activities that families can do at home to help students master those skills. Our families practice the activities with other families in the class, and each family sets 60-day academic goals for their student. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Pupil Accounting Secretary Parents, Students September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, grade teacher teams, Instructional Coach, Administrators September 2018-June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Teachers, Administrators Open House Tuesdays. Calendar of events distributed to families. Additional actions include: Parents, Students  ELL teachers will conduct workshops for parents to help them understand the three program choices (Transitional Bilingual, Dual Language, Freestanding ESL) for ELLs.  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, School Quality Guide, Quality Review Report, and Learning Environment Survey Report.  Schedule parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed  Provide written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress  Encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee;  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include parenting skills, understanding educational accountability CCLS aligned grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home Academic town hall. Hold a welcome back ‘town hall’ meeting for all new and returning parents and students. At this meeting administration will outline the school’s mission and vision, the instructional focus for the year, the CEP goals and action plans, share the Family Involvement and Engagement plans, give parents access to accounts on iReady, share the PD plan and invite parents to attend Mondays, and share the assessment calendar for the year. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Administrators If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent Engagement initiative - the Parent Coordinator will continue to plan parent engagement activates that welcome that welcome all families into the school community, improve communication, support student success, advocate for students, share power,and collaborate with the community Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Parent Volunteers, various communications systems such as, Remind App, School Messenger. PA activities are funded through Title I. Parent/Staff professional development and after school activities will be funded through Title I. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By spring of 2019 systems will be firmly in place to ensure effective communication between home and school. 2. Collect, record, analyze parents’ attendance at all events in which their participation is requested and Implement a “Parent Report Card” 3. Collect, record, analyze student attendance/lateness in school and during school day, after school programs. 4. Monitor which families are communicating with their child’s teacher, accessing assignments, or checking grades. 5. Administer DRP reading baseline September 2018, Administer DRP secondary assessment to identify areas of gains and of need, Administer Spring DRP summative assessment with an expected gain of 18 months to 2 year reading 6. By February 2019 teacher teams will have analyzed the results of the quantifiable mid-point NYC ELA and Math Spring Benchmark administered February 2019 and the NYC ELA and Math Winter Benchmark administered in December 2018 to measure our progress towards meeting annual academic goals Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. APTT data, parent surveys, school function attendance and increase in enrollment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher teams and PPC meet in inquiry cycles to identify students in the lowest third Teacher teams and PPC meet in inquiry cycles to identify students in the lowest third Teacher teams and PPC meet in inquiry cycles to identify students in the lowest third Teacher teams and PPC meet in inquiry cycles to identify students in the lowest third At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher teams and PPC meet in inquiry cycles to identify students in the lowest third Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Targeted Interventions around Reading and Analyzing Literary and Informational Texts, Writing Process Targeted Interventions around Skills Intervention, Problem Solving, Mathematical Investigations, Writing in Mathematics Targeted Interventions around Exit Project, Scientific Method, Reading Comprehension and Writing Strategies Targeted Interventions around Exit Project, Debating, Reading Comprehension and Writing Strategies Peer Mediation, Crisis Intervention, Counseling, Check-In/Check-Out, Behavior Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Flexible small group, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after school hours, Saturdays Flexible small group, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after school hours, Saturdays Flexible small group, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after school hours, Saturdays Flexible small group, one-to-one tutoring During the school day, after school hours, Saturdays Flexible small group, one-to-one sessions, push-in/pull-out as needed, During the school day, after school hours, Saturdays 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Networking with outside agencies academically and/or present with behavioral or social/emotional challenges that require Tier II/Tier III interventions Intervention Plan, RtI in ELA and Math, Peer Mediation, Young Men/Young Women (Gender-Based Grouping), Crisis Intervention, Family Counseling, Behavior Modification Techniques 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have thirteen students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide school uniforms, book bags, and school supplies to all students identified as students in temporary housing (STH). Additionally, for those in the 8th grade we provide graduation resources (cap and gown, yearbook, student photos, senior trip fees, graduation celebration fees). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). . 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  . 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. .. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● IS 98 will continue to recruit highly qualified candidates for vacant core subject area positions, abiding by city, state and federal laws in hiring practices and upholding UFT collective bargaining agreements. ● IS 98 will participate in citywide recruiting events. ● Share the school’s strong support plan for teachers, such as, but not limited to the following: o Mentoring for new teachers (1-3 years) with New Teacher Center (NTC) program supports o Individual Teacher Improvement Plans (ITIPS) for developing and struggling tenured teachers; o Professional development opportunities inside and outside the school; o Encourage teachers to continue their education and obtain higher degrees, additional certifications, bilingual extensions through UFT, district and Department of Education sponsored programs and grants; o Provide time for teacher collaboration through scheduling; o Include teachers in professional development planning and decision making. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). See description of special programs and academic initiatives as described in Section 4: SCEP Overview and again in Sections 5A Part 3, 5B Part 3, 5C Part 3, 5D Part 3, 5E Part 3 within the various action plans. Part 3: TA Schools Only 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. . 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). . Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Teachers will meet weekly to share feedback from inter-visitations; ● Have teachers team design professional development activities that address common development needs across grade levels or departments; ● Develop shared norms among school leaders and teachers for engaging in feedback; ● Promote self-reflection on the part of teachers and administrators before feedback conversations; ● Ask for teachers’ input on what type of feedback they find most helpful; ● Discuss different parts of the rubric and examples of effective and highly effective practice in the classroom; ● Instructional Leads and SLT members participate in identifying the CEP goals; ● Teachers will meet in grade-level and departmental meetings to analyze student data, look at student work to plan, adjust instruction and set goals for students; ● Teachers will meet during grade level and/or departmental team meetings to review student data and look at student work to continue the cycle of inquiry; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  ● Local Measures Committee inclusive of teachers and administration determine which local measures make most sense for our school; ● Committee decision on MOSL selections shared with staff and revisited during Initial Planning Conference (IPC) 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column B Column A 237,584.00 x Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Section 5A part 4a1 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal .N/A .N/A 0 12,366.00 0 $2,137,358.00 .N/A .N/A . x . x Tax Levy (FSF) Local Section 5E part 4a1 .N/A .N/A . Section 5A part 4a1 . Section 5A parts 4a, 4b Section 5B parts4a, 4b Section 5D parts4a, 4b 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Hermam Ritter JHS 98, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Herman Ridder JHS 98 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSAState accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  School-Parent Compact (SPC) [Herman Ridder JHS 98 ,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.itle I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: proficient proficient JHS 98 proposes to utilize Title III supplementary funds by providing an intensive small group instructional program in literacy for ELL's and former ELL's. Parents will be able to register their children in the After School Academy. 2016-2017 Quality Review and 2017-2018 PPO indicated a need for coherence of instructional shifts across grades and content areas. As such, teachers continue to need support to strengthen the link between their learning targets and tasks. While the school has made gains in engaging students in challenging texts while promoting evidence in argument within peer to peer discussion utilizing accountable talk as part of the instructional focus, this has yet to fully transfer to stronger writing across the content areas. End of year MOSL data indicates that while many students made impressive gains from BOY to EOY NYC Performance Tasks this did not translate into the same gains in student outcome in state exams. NYS Common Core ELA exam results rose from 10% to 13% proficiency with 0% of ELLs proficient. NYS Common Core Math results dropped from 18% to 10% with 10% of ELLs proficient. Additionally, 2017 NYSESLAT results show a mostly upward trend of proficiency for tested students. 40% of 6th graders tested moved one or more proficiency levels. 63% of 7th graders tested moved one or more proficiency levels. 33% of tested 8th graders made gains of one proficiency level, while 56% of tested 8th graders made gains of two or more proficiency levels. To address our areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year (QR 1.2 - Instruction that is consistently cognitively challenging and promotes high levels of student engagement. QR 2.2 - Use of assessments that are fully aligned to standards maximizing teacher and students’ accurate understanding of progress toward achievement) we will put in place the systems and structures that will enable teachers to implement writing units with a special focus on English Language Learners (ELLs). We will ensure ELLs access to rigorous curriculum and opportunities to engage with levelled and challenging text, instructing them in the writing process (Teachers’ College RWP), and developing an assessment system that allows for transparency of progress and needs. The Title III After School Academy program will include academic support for ELLs in reading and math provided by one content area teacher certified in the area of ELA, one bilingual math teacher, and one ENL teacher. The content area HLA/ENL teacher and the bilingual math teacher, will co-plan and co-teach with an ENL certified teacher. Students will be grouped by grade when participating in CMP3 math investigations to ensure that students are exposed to their grade level standards. Students will be grouped by design within the language lab ENL portions of the program to reflect readiness and ability within their ELL classification. The ENL and HLA/ENL teacher will provide work to the ENL providers, to co-plan and co-teach. The 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Title III After School Program will run from 2:30 pm - 4:30 pm on Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays for 12 weeks starting October 15, 2018 and ending May 17, 2019. The languages of instruction will be English and Spanish. The after school program allows for intensive small group instruction within rotating 40 minute periods. The teacher and ENL provider will work using various co-teaching models to provide direct instruction around vocabulary building using Word Generation texts. Additionally, they will engage students in differentiated extensions of math "investigations" within the common core aligned CMP3 math curriculum. Finally, students will be given an opportunity to work independently through technology by engaging in direct reading instruction through Read 180, Imagine Learning, I-Ready ELA, and interventions through mathematics software (iReady). Our staff consists of two bilingual content area and one ENL pedagogue. The technology based reading and mathematics enrichment used within the after school program that will be used is i-Ready Diagnostic, Finish Line NY ELLs, Read 180, Imagine Learning, and Instruction Program. The goal of these well researched interventions is to enrich student experience through differentiation of skills through the use of a computer program, literature, and direct instruction in reading/math skills within a common core aligned curriculum. Teacher reports will help develop an action plan for individual and group instruction. With these programs' explicit online instructional modules, students are automatically placed into instruction at their level based on diagnostic results. They engage the learners in a low-risk environment. Progress monitoring will provide immediate insight into student performance. The common core aligned Mathematics and English Language Arts curriculum: CMP3, Finish Line NY Ells, Ready Math, Ready ELA texts, and genuine home language leveled texts will be integrated into the Title III After School Academy supplementary program. The strategies and techniques in these programs supplement the core Language Arts and Mathematics curriculum providing opportunities for expansion on concepts learned during the school day. This will make learning more comprehensive and meaningful to ELL students. The ENL activities in these programs use grade-level mathematics and language arts content as the vehicle for language development. All newcomers receive instruction in Spanish. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers have a greater impact on student success than any other school factor as decades of research has proved. To support teachers as we continue to implement the Common Core and the Framework for Great Schools, on-going professional development workshops for teachers will be conducted throughout the school year. We are forecast through the emerging Professional Learning plan for 2018-2019 that the Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Coach, and ELL Instructional Lead/Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part C: Professional Development will facilitate the trainings listed below. All teachers will attend the trainings. Pedagogues working in the After School and Saturday Academy Title III supplementary program will participate in professional development opportunities geared toward improved ENL and Bilingual instruction. Pedagogical staff working with ELL's will be meeting on a monthly basis with the school, District, and Borough ELL point to ensure that this group receives all services required by CR Part 154. Professional development will also be organized around the Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives for ELL's. - Data Analysis, Accountability Tools and Resources - Advance - Measure of Student Learning - Norming Protocol for Analysis of student work - Quality Review indicators - Positive Behavior Intervention and Supports (PBIS) and Classroom Management - Danielson's Framework for Teaching - Reciprocal Reading Protocol - ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) In addition to the above-mentioned workshops, the following workshops will continue to be provided to the Title III teachers and teachers working with ELLs. A series of workshops titled "Classroom Instruction that Works with English Language Learners" will be provided to teachers working with ELLs during the month of November on the following Mondays : November 5, 12, 19, and 26 2018. They will run from 2:20 p.m. - 3:40 p.m. during contractual professional learning time. These workshops will consist of nine research-based instructional strategies that have proved to be exceptionally effective in increasing student academic performances. We will continue to work with Dr. Maria Diaz with the Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network (RBERN) at NYU and with administration to design this professional development to be facilitated by Assistant Principals, Instructional Coach, ELA Instructional Lead, and ELL Instructional Lead. The nine strategies are as follows: - Setting objectives and providing feedback - Non-linguistic representations - Engaging students in learning. "Ramping up Rigor" - Cooperative learning - Summarizing and note taking - Analyzing student work products to establish next steps for students and teachers. - Aligning learning targets to common core learning standards - Using/Tracking formative assessment during instruction. - Using questioning and discussion techniques to make learning more student centered. Additionally, as part of the school's Professional Development Plan the following differentiated PDs are being developed: January 7, 2019 What is Scaffolding? (2:20 p.m. – 3:40 p.m.) Attendees: ELA teachers working with ELLs / Facilitator: APs, ELA and ELL Instructional leads January 28, 2019 Common Core Mathematics for ELLs ( 2:20 p.m. – 3:40 p.m.) Attendees: Math teachers working with ELLs / Facilitators: APs, Math and ELL Instructional Lead 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Part C: Professional Development January 29, 2019 Preparing Students for the 2017 NYSESLAT (2:20 p.m. – 3:40 p.m.) Attendees: Teachers working with ELLs / Facilitator: APs, Testing Coordinator, ENL Teacher, ELL point February 11, 2019 Promotion Criteria for ELLs (2:20 p.m. - 3:40 p.m.) Attendees: Teachers working with ELLs / Facilitator: APs, ELL point, Testing Coordinator February 25, 2019 Text Complexity and English Learners – Building Vocabulary (2:20 p.m. – 3:20 p.m.) Attendees: Teachers working with ELLs / Facilitator: ELL and ELA Instructional Leads, APs February 26, 2019 Understanding and Administering the 2019 NYSESLAT (2:20 p.m. - 3:40 p.m.) Attendees: Teachers working with ELLs / Facilitator: Principal, ENL Teacher June 3, 2019 Looking Ahead for 2019-20: What’s Next for Our ELL Program? (2:20 p.m. - 3:20 p.m.) Attendees: All teachers / Facilitators: Coach, Instructional Leads - Math, ELA, ELL, ENL The ENL teacher will continue to attend workshops for supporting ELLs provided by the Office of English Language Learners as necessary. The principal, assistant principal and instructional coach will provide differentiated workshops to teachers, as necessary, on each domain and competency of Danielson's Framework for Teaching throughout the school year. Outside workshops will be attended by pedagogues working with ELL's, as informed by need. Dates to be determined (TBD.) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: To encourage and provide parents the opportunities to participate in the educational process of their children, meetings and workshops for the parents of ELLs are scheduled as follows: Parents will be notified of any forthcoming events/activities through letters, emails, school website, School App, and/or telephone calls. The written communication will be translated into the home language. Regular workshops will be held to accommodate parents of ELL's whose primary language is Spanish. These workshops are held throughout the month for the entire school year. The Academic Parent Teacher Teams (APTT) will be used as a high impact system of family engagement that aligns grade level learning concepts, student performance data, and family-teacher communication and collaboration. The APTT model provides school leaders and teachers with a developmental and collaborative process for building strong relationships with 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities families focused on student academic growth and achievement. The APTT process and our school Comprehensive Education Plan (CEP), connects with alignment to our literacy and math goals. The workshops will aim improve the parents' language acquisition and improve their ability to help with homework, maximize school/family communication, and increase parental involvement in school activities. The ultimate goal of the workshops will be to show the parents how their involvement in the school community has a correlation with student achievement. The following is forecast list of workshops to be offered to parents of ELLs : July 10 and 17, 2018 and September 20, 2018 - VIP Night: Exploring our Mission, Literacy Vision, and Expectations (Break-out session for parents of ELLs in which the ELL policy brief will be discussed, staffing and programming are discussed, ELL parent brochure is distributed, and parent orientation video shown) 5:00 - 7:00pm October 24, 2018 - Read 180, Imagine Learning, iReady ELA and Mathematics programs for Title III - LEP provided by ENL Teacher and AP/ELL Point. December 2018 (TBD)- Interpreting/Analyzing NYC Fall Periodic Assessment Data for ELLs provided by ENL Teacher and AP/ELL Point. January 2019 (TBD) - Read 180, Imagine Learning, iReady ELA and Mathematics programs for Title III - LEP provided by ENL Teacher and AP/ELL Point. March 2019 (TBD) - How to Prepare your Child for the 2019 NYS Common Core Tests (Break-out session for parents of ELLs provided by ENL Teacher and AP/ELL Point in which testing preparedness and test taking strategies will be discussed along with the promotional policy for ELLs) March 2019 (TBD) - How to prepare your Child for the 2019 NYSESLAT provided by ENL Teacher and AP/ELL Point in which testing preparedness and test taking strategies will be discussed along with the programming of minimum amount of minutes of ENL April 2019 (TBD) - Promotion Standards, Chancellor's Regulation A-501: Promotion Criteria for ELLs provided by Principal and Assistant Principal Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Herman Ridder Intermediate School Borough Bronx School Number 098 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mark Turcotte Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dulcinea del Solar Teacher/Subject Area Omar Ulffe/ Math Teacher/Subject Area Stephanie Puente/ Sci, SS, Related-Service Provider Walter Morgan Superintendent Rafaela Espinal Assistant Principal Asia Burnett Coach School Counselor Sue Parker Parent Jenny Sanchez Parent Coordinator Dulce Reyes Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 245 Total number of ELLs 76 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.02% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 4 2 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses Degrees of Reading Power and secondary assessments such as running records to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. This data provides us with a wealth of information about our ELLs reading literacy skills including accuracy, fluency, comprehension and phonemic awareness, letter learning, and high frequency word knowledge. This information helps inform our schools instructional plans. This information is shared with all of the ELLs teachers so that instruction can be rigorous and differentiated as well as aligned to standards for these students in all content areas. A review of the quantitative 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  data available on our students shows that many ELLs are on reading levels that are one to three grades behind their actual grade. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers meet with their designated PLCs by content to look at student work and inform instruction. ENL and Bilingual teachers also meet as a separate PLC to discuss and plan for the unique needs of their students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Incoming students whose native language is not English are administered the NYSITELL English proficiency exam upon entry. Those students whose native language is Spanish are administered the Spanish LAB as well as periodic citywide assessments in Spanish (i.e. Grade level HLA exams)We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs based on the gains and success they obtain on formative and summative assessments such as the periodic assessments, NYSESLAT, and NYS ELA and Math tests. In addition, we also take into consideration the students' classwork, report cards, teacher observations, parental, and student feedback about our program. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students are given teacher feedback on their work including necessary next steps to master the skill(s) being addressed. Teachers conference with students and parents periodically to address whether or not the necessary progress has been made and to make any necessary adjustments to the students' programming. In addition the school utilizes the Title III grant 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All students are given rigorous English language instruction. Students in the TBE class are grouped according to their English language proficiency, as shown by their performance on the previous year's NYSESLAT exam. Students in the general program receive between 180 and 360 minutes of integrated and/or stand alone ENL instruction, based on the same. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. An analysis of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores is conducted and the data patterns across proficency levels in all grades is analyzed.The results are then used to plan ENL service hours and instruction. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? This information is shared with staff during departmental PLC's, during Monday professional development meetings, and during individual meetings between content area teachers and ENL staff. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  IS 98 has a Freestanding/Stand alone ENL program in which instruction is delivered to general education ELLs in both an integrated co-teaching model and stand alone ENL instruction, as dictated by the students' English proficiency levels along with CR Part 154 regulations. Instruction is given by a NYS licensed ENL teacher. During periods ofintegrated instruction, ENL teacher co-plans instruction with content area teachers where necessary to modify instruction using the necessary scaffolds for ELL's (visuals, front-loading vocabulary, providing background knowledge). The ENL teacher provides one period of stand alone instruction each day for ELL's with an English proficiency level of Entering or Emerging. b. TBE program. If applicable. IS 98 has a TBE program in which instruction in Spanish and English is delivered to general education ELLs in a in a self-contained setting. The current class is a 7 th and 8 th grade bridge class due to low enrollment. Students receive content area instruction in Science, Social Studies, Math, HLA and ELA from teachers who are licensed in Bilingual Education. The language of instruction varies according to the students' English level, according to state regulations, with the goal of transitioning the students from Spanish to English while maintaining their content area skills. Our school utilizes the workshop model for balanced literacy. The program models are Block and Heterogenous. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? IS 98 ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels by placing all general education ELLs in one class per 6th, 7th and 8th grade level as well as all special education ELLs in one class per 6th, 7th, and 8th grade levels. Through this arrangement, the ESL teacher can provide them with their mandated number of minute periods allowing this form of flexibility. Explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes are delivered through push-in model occurring during ENL/ELA, Mathematics, Science,Social Studies, and dedicated HLA instructional periods. Students have 8 periods of ELA instruction weekly, 8 periods of Math instruction weekly, and 4 periods of forty five minute social studies, Science, HLA classes weekly. Students are serviced their mandated minutes based on their varying levels of proficiency (360 minutes for entering and emerging, 180 minutes for transitioning and expanding, and 90 mintes ) during ELA, Mathematics, and Social Studies, Science, and targeted intervention instructional periods during the week. HLA supports are provided using materials that are grade and age appropriate that are aligned with the school’s curriculum and state standards. In addition to native language materials, the ENL teacher, LOTE Teacher and paraprofessionals provide native language support orally and with explanations. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content areas are delivered to the students in English along with a variety of ENL strategies including an emphasis on key vocabulary and visual supports. In our program model, students travel together to 45 minute periods for all content area classes including Science, Social Studies, HLA, Visual Arts, Library/Tech and Gym. There are double blocks of 90 minutes for ELA and Mathematics where the schedule allows it. A sample schedule for an ENL student at our school would show two ninety minute blocks of both ELA and Math, one forty five minute period of science, social studies, , and Art. All instruction is given in English, with ENL and native language support present whenever possible in the classroom to help make content comprehensible. Native language support occurs through students who speak the same native language, support staff that speaks the student’s language, dictionaries, glossaries and books that are grade and age appropriate that are aligned with the school’s curriculum and state standards. Many of the student textbooks used in our school have translated copies in Spanish which provided further native language support. The Total Physical Response (TPR) Approach, Language Experience Approach and Balanced Literacy Approach are used to serve the needs of the ELLs. In addition, scaffolding techniques including 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  modeling, contextualization, prior knowledge, schema building, visual aids, graphic organizers and guided practice are used to support the language development of the ELLs in ENL and content area classes. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language, the Spanish LAB is administered to the students when necessary. As a Free Standing ENL Program, all instructions and assessments are given in English. However, translated version of the citywide and state assessments are requested and provided to ELLs as needed. They are also provided with bilingual dictionary and/or glossaries. In addition, the Spanish Proficiency Examination is administered to 8th graders in June. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for all students including ELLs and has specific plan for each subgroup. Instruction for ELLs is differentiated according to their proficiency levels and individual needs. a. Our staff is trained to identify SIFE students using the SIFE Lens exam, as well as the Academic Language and Literacy Diagnostic (ALLD) assessment to determine necessary literacy interventions. We assess the students using the DRP system (English) and ELE (Spanish) to determine the students' reading level and comprehension and to provide us information about the students writing abilities. The data, in addition to teacher observations and assessments, will be used to set individual goals for this student. Depending on the students proficiency in their native language, native language support materials will be used to provide support to student. Instruction in the classroom will be differentiated to suit the needs of SIFE student while still maintaining academic rigor. b. Our instructional plan for ELLs in school less than three years is to provide occasional pull out instruction targeted toward vocabulary, reading comprehension and writing development. Since NCLB now requires ELA testing for ELLs after one year we plan to support these ELLs by familiarizing them with the ELA testing format and vocabulary while using guided scaffolded instruction that integrates strategies and skills similar to those incorporated into the exam. Instruction for ELLs is differentiated according to their proficiency levels and individual needs. c. Our instructional plan to help move ELLs receiving 4 to 6 years of service to proficient level is by using assessment data (from the NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessment, New York State Tests, ARIS, alternative assessments and observations) to identify student weaknesses and strengths that will drive differentiated rigorous instruction across all content areas. The data will be used in goal setting across all content areas. Trends have shown that ELLs in this subgroup at our school tend to need interventions in reading and writing which is taken into consideration when teachers are planning their lessons. d. Our instructional plan to move Long-Term ELLs to proficiency is by using assessment data ( from the NYSESLAT, ELL Periodic Assessment, New York State Tests, ARIS, and alternative assessments and observations) to identify student weaknesses and strengths to drive differentiated rigorous instruction across all content areas. Each Long-Term ELL data is carefully reviewed and used to target very specific skills or areas in need of improvement. If certain interventions or instructional strategies are not effective they will be addressed by the ENL and content area teachers. This information will be used to set individual goals across all content areas. e. In order to best serve our ELLs with special needs we take into account the styles and settings in which these students learn best and differentiate instruction to meet their needs. We also utilize technology- based programs that are engaging and challenging for each student. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use the following instructional strategies and grade-level materials to accelerate English language development: - Direct instruction, one-to-one/small group instruction, centers, balanced literacy approach, guided reading, readers/writers workshop, peer review and use of technology.. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, the following initiatives are being implemented: - AIS push-in model, targeted RtI, Flexible Child Study Team, mainstreaming, use of intervention periods to provide targeted instruction, sharing of best practices through intervisitations, strong teacher teaming practices. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 5 additional periods of target intervention is provided to ELLs (both in ENL program and TBE program) each week. Students receive one to two weekly periods of reading intervention using small group instruction or co-teaching instructional models (either Read 180 tier III, Wilson Tier III, and/or i-Ready ELA Tier II). Students receive one to two weekly periods of math intervention using small group instruction or co-teaching instructional models (either IXL Math Tier II, or i-Ready Math Tier II). Students receive one to two weekly periods of content writing intervention in social studies and/or science using small group instruction or co-teaching instructional models (supports the grade level genre writing in the content areas work that the larger grade is engaging in through the Teacher's College Reading and Writing Program). 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? If budget permits, we are going to offer another program that will suit the needs of the students for the upcoming year. As we grow our school through increased student enrollment through better recruitment practices introduced by the new administration, we envision a separate TBE class/program in each grade level. Administration is encouraging staff to gain bilingual extensions in their content areas. Once these goals are obtained we will consider opening a dual language program as well. We will continue to obtain more resources and materials to meet the needs of ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There won't be any discontinued program/services for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all programs in our school. All ELLs receive interventions during targeted intervention periods five times a week - total of 225 minutes. Title III LEP supplemental services are offered for two hours three times a week after school from October through June. In addition, students who qualify recieve additional services through the Title III Immigrant Program. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. In addition to the textbooks, reading materials and resources that are used in different subject areas, we provide ELLs with additional instructional materials that are suited to their levels such as reading books, both in English and Spanish, bilingual dictionaries, and translated edition of the textbooks. Technology used for instruction includes, but are not limited to i-Ready 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  ELA amd Math, Read 180, and projectors/ smart boards. Entering and emerging students who are not enrolled in the transitional bilingual program receive iPads for translation purposes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language support is provided when possible through the content area teacher, ENL teacher, paraprofessionals, and/or through texts that are available in both English and the students’ native language. In addition, students have the use of iPads for translation and bilingual dictionaries or glossaries, which they are encouraged to familiarize themselves with in anticipation of using them during state exams. Our school has a variety of reading materials in Spanish that are grade and age appropriate and are aligned with state standards. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. To determine whether the required services, support, and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and levels, a three-year trend analysis of student performance data on city and state assessments was conducted. The NYSESLAT scores for the last three years were analyzed to determine their strengths and weaknesses across the four modalities of reading, writing, speaking and listening. We then, share the data with all the teachers working with ELLs so that instruction can be differentiated in all subject areas. The ELLs are provided with necessary academic interventions during and after school hours based on the analysis of the data. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Students are allowed and encouraged to use our library, which is located on a floor which houses another school. In addition, students share two gymnasiums, a cafeteria and school yard with the other two schools (high schools) housed in our building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL students receive information about our school during orientation a week before school starts. They meet the principal, assistant principal, parent coordinator, and their teachers. They are given tour of the school. Each student is assigned a buddy or school ambassador, who speaks the student’s native language, to help each new student adjust to our school environment. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? At this time, we don’t have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  . To support teachers as we continue to implement the Common Core and the Citywide Instructional Expectations, on-going professional development workshops for teachers will be conducted throughout the school year. . The workshops will be conducted during the different scheduled Professional Learning Communities (PLC) meetings every week. The following workshops will be conducted during the months of September and October - Framework for Great Schools - Common Core Learning Standards in ELA and Mathematics - Instructional Shifts in ELA and Mathematics - Data Analysis, Accountability Tools and Resources - Advance - Measure of Student Learning - New York City Performance Assessments - Norming Protocol - Quality Review - Classroom Management In addition to the above-mentioned workshops, series of workshops will be conducted monthly. The first series of workshops will be about the i-Ready Reading and Mathematics Program. The Title III teachers, teachers programmed to teach intervention periods, and teachers working with ELLs will receive the training. The Literacy and Mathematics Instructional Leads and the Peer Instructional Coach will facilitate the workshops. Another series of workshops will be about "Classroom Instruction that Works with English Language Learners". These workshops consist of nine research-based instructional strategies that proved to be exceptionally effective in increasing student performance. They are as follows: - Setting objectives and providing feedback - Nonliguistic representations - Cues, questions, and advance organizers - Cooperative learning - Summarizing and note taking - Homework and practice - Reinforcing effort and providing recognition - Generating and testing hypotheses - Identifying similarities and differences. The Assitant Principals, Coach, ENL teacher and Test Coordinator will facilitate these workshops. The ENL teacher will monthly district ELL liason meetings, as well as other workshops for ELLs provided by the Office of English Language Learners as necessary. She will then turnkey vital information to the rest of staff during departmental PLC's and weekly PD's. The principal, assistant principal and instructional coaches will provide differentiated workshops to teachers, as necessary, on each domain and competency of Danielson Framework for Teaching throughout the school year. In addition to the above-mentioned professional development workshops, the ELA and mathematics teachers have been attending a series of Common Core curriculum workshops over the past school year. The ELA teachers have been attending the Expeditionary Learning while the mathematics teachers have been attending the Connected Mathematics Project. These workshops are provided by the publishers under the supervision of the Department of Education. In addition, the school leadership and guidance counselor support the staff members and parent coordinator by communicating with ELLs and their parents regarding specific issues that need their attention and guidance. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To assist ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school, the guidance counselor received professional development workshops such as, but not limited to, the following topics: High School Articulation, Response to Intervention, Gathering and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Analyzing Student Data from Multiple Sources, and Inquiry Process. These workshops were turn keyed to staff members. Additionally, all 8 th grade ELLs are enrolled in a course called College and Career Readiness (CCR) that meets once a week to assist students with articulation to H.S., social and emotional needs, the college process, and job/career readiness. Our schools CEP goals around instruction and student learning are all targeted at ELLs (and SWDs). Therefore, the professional learning calendar was developed to teach all staff the strategies of effective instruction for this (these) populations. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school has been selected by the Office of Community Schools and the Middle School Quality Initiative to participate in the Academic Parent Teacher Teams (APTT) cohort. The key stakeholders for implementation will include Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Peer Instructional Coach, and the lead teacher(s) for the grade(s) targeted for APTT. In addition, the ENL teacher meets with individual families during parent teacher conferences to discuss their child's language develoment and needs. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Every effort is made to involve parents in the education of their children. To increase parental engagement, including parents of ELLs, administrators, staff and Parent Coordinator will plan and implement the following strategies and activities during 2015-2016 school year. - ELL teachers will conduct workshop for parents to help them understand the three program choices (Transitional Bilingual, Dual Language, Freestanding ESL) for ELLs. - The Data Specialist will conduct workshop to provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system: NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels in NYSESLAT, ELA and Mathematics, Annual School Report Card, Quality Review Report, and Learning Environment Survey Report. - Schedule parent meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions. These meetings will be conducted by the principal and/or assistant principal. - Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed - Provide written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress - Encourage meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent –Guardian Association and Title I Parent Committee; - Parent Coordinator will provide training on how to use ARIS Parent Link. - Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include parenting skills, understanding current educational issues such as the Common Core and Citywide Instructional Expectations; literacy, mathematics, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home - Arrange opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child's class and to observe classroom activities. - Invite parents to participate in cultural celebrations such as Harvest Dance, Hispanic Heritage Month, and African-American Month - Invite parents to participate in celebrating the academic achievement of their children during the Honor and Award Assembly four times a year - Conduct workshops about the citywide and state assessments: periodic assessments, NYESLAT, NYS ELA, Mathematics, and Science Tests. The Test Coordinator, Literacy Instructional Lead, and Mathematics Instructional Lead will facilitate these 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  workshops. The above-mentioned workshops/trainings will be conducted monthly in collaboration with the Parent-Guardian Association (PGA). The parents will be notified of any forthcoming events/activities through letters, emails, and/or telephone calls. The written communication will be translated in the language that parents can understand. The ELL parents will continue to be an integral part of our Title III LEP Program. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mark Turcotte, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Herman Ridder IS 98 School DBN: 12X098 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mark Turcotte Asia Burnett Dulce Reyes Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Stephanie Puente ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kenia Dupuy Parent D. Del Solar Jill Malone Reinis Visners Sue Parker Rafaela Espinal Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 9/11/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: Herman Ridder Superintendent: Rafaela Espinal DBN: 12X098 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Dulcinea Del Solar ENL Coordinator Yes Dulce Reyes Parent Coordinator Yes 11/28/2016 Yes No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. IS 98 uses data to indicate to the language preferences of all parents. Upon arrival, families who indicate they speak a language other than English are administered the Home Language Survey by a licensed pedagogue. This data is then entered and can be seen in ATS reports (RESI, RMNR, RLAT, RHLA, RPOB, RAPL, RCPL) and by inputting this data into the Data Analysis and AMAO tool. Consulting these data systems allows us to be able to assess parent need. The LAC and Parent Coordinator assist us in identifying those parents who need written information in a language other than English, and assistance from interpreters, during our Open School Night, Parent Teacher Conferences, APTT meetings, and for periodic notifications. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral -2 -4 -137 -201 Arabic Bengali Spanish English (data as of 9/12/18) -0.58 -1.16 -39.6 -58.09 -2 -4 -137 -201 -0.58 -1.16 -39.6 -58.09 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A as of data collected in RCPL on 9/12/18 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Notification of Open School Night Yearly in September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. DOE translation services (2 weeks advance notice) Notification of Parent Teacher Conferences Other PTA Notices Notification of ENL service entitlement 4x/ year monthly "" "" "" "" after completing NYSITELL (1x) Translation of letter from DOE website, or use of DOE vendor, if home language is not available. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  Notification of NYSESLAT testing 1x/ year (May) """" 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences 4x/ year interpretation service(s)? In-house personnel & DOE Language Line PTA meetings 1x/ month In-house SLT meetings 1x/ month, 3 hours Translations of covered languages available on the DOE website. If necessary, we will use the DOE vendor to translate non-covered languages or read information to the parent Chancellor's backpack notices APTT meetings High School informational meetings ongoing 4x/ year "" "" "" "" "" "" 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In case of an emergency the PAS will activate an automatic robocall notification through ATS which sends messages to families' given emergency contact numbers in their specified home language (also indicated by ATS) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will receive an in-house professional development regarding language access services. A copy of Chancellor’s regulation A-663 will be distributed and explained to all staff. All available DOE language access services will be explained to staff , as well as the three step flyer to access Language Line. Staff will be trained on how to use three-way calling interpreters for parent conferencing and DOE vendor options for translation Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As per the Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 regarding parental notification requirements for translation and interpretation, DOE signage in the main lobby and office indicates to parents that these services are available. The school uses designated staff members to translate during parent teacher conferences, PTA meetings and SLT meetings.Backpack notices are sent in English and Spanish, and other DOE supported languages according to our student population. In addition, DOE vendors are used to translate documents and to provide on site interpretation for families. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use the Language Access Parent Survey, in the appropriate DOE supported language, to receive parent feedback which we will use to improve the translation and interpretation services we currently have in place. (If the survey needs to be given in a language not covered, the survey will be read to the parent using over the phone interpretation.) In this way we will improve communication with all of our families. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85 
