 11X105 School Name: P.S. 105 SEN ABRAHAM BERNSTEIN Principal: CHRISTOPHER EUSTACE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information Senator Abraham Bernstein School 11X105 321100010105 K-5 725 Brady Ave. Bronx, NY 10462 718-824-7350 School Number (DBN): 718-828-4531 Fax: School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: Christopher Eustace ceustac@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Christopher Eustace Grace Gusmano Mary Tirado Nancy Gargiulo N/A ShkelzeneAxhanela District Information Geographical District: 11 Jeremy Kabinoff Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Ave. Bronx, NY 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jkabino@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)519-2626 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx (718) 519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Ave. Bronx, NY 10462 Juruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Christopher Eustace Grace Guzmano Mary Tirado Nancy Gargiulo Lauren O'Neill Celina Valentin Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Aisha Anwar SamiaKhan Eddy Chaumette Susan Saadah Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of our school is to provide a safe environment for children to learn and for staff to teach, as well as to provide an environment that will produce life long learners through CCLS driven and differentiated instruction, which meets the needs of the school’s diverse community.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Public School 105 is located on Brady Avenue in the Pelham Parkway section of the Bronx. There are approximately 1,080 students, in grades K-5. Aligning instruction to the CCLS and identifying the academic and social needs of children is the primary factor to achieve a path of excellence. When the needs of children are accurately “mapped” the vehicle of instruction becomes a more effective means to achievement. Excellence is the goal for every child and staff member so that improved achievement levels can be realized. For this realization, “change” in programs, the way resources are used in the organization of the school, in instructional strategies, and how parents become effective partners in the educational process are necessary. At PS 105 we recognize that families and other community members are a vital part of all students’ academic and social success and consider family involvement an essential ingredient for a successful educational program. As part of our continuing effort to improve teacher teams and collaboration, we will continue to work with Instructional Consultant, Dr. Donnell Gregory. Dr. Gregory has been working with teacher teams and different cohorts of teachers for the past three years. To date, our teams have been in-house. We have established a "Community of Learners" cohort in which we have partnered with P.S. 89 and P.S. 108, both schools with similar demographics and instructional needs. As a new Community Learning School, we will make more services immediately available and make access to them more convenient for students and the community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our culturally diverse student population represents over 20 different countries that span from Eastern Europe to South America, from Russia to the Middle East. Our students also speak over 10 different language or dialects. As you can imagine, that produces quite a number of English Language Learners. In fact, ELL students represent almost 22% of our total student population. Our LRE movement over the last several years, and the data associated with this initiative, is a highlight of our school. SWD account for approximately 20% of our student population, but less than 10% of that total are placed in self-contained classes. We have increased our ICT model to include 14 full time classes. Progress data for SWD in ICT classes far surpass the progress of students in self-contained classes. Due to our large ELLs and SWD population, we are in need of a multitude of support and differentiated instruction that will assist in processing and demonstrating understanding in focus areas. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the greatest growth was rigorous instruction. According to our MOLP rating we improved in three areas, pedagogy (1.2), resource allocation (1.3), and high expectations (3.4). One of the recommendations that we received was to implement an online system of communication to inform parents and the school community of students’ performance. This year, all teachers will be using DataCation, an online tool for teachers, administrators, parents, and students to track student progress in real time. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X105 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1101 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 33 33 25 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 64 53 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 88.4% % Reduced Lunch 26.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 62.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 15.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 12.12 0% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 82% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES NO NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES NO YES YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES YES YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 193 193 19 92.4% 2.7% 18.3% 11.4% 8.1% 2.0% 10 16% 9.7 32.5% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES YES YES N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  According to our MOLP rating, our school was proficient in making sure that teachers ensure that unit and lesson plans are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and integrate the instructional shifts. Curricula and academic tasks are planned and refined using student work and data. This year we will continue to have common planning time in the schedule. This will allow for teachers and coaches to work together as a team to help introduce complex materials that stimulate higher-order thinking and build a deep conceptual understanding and knowledge about specific content through rigorous instruction.  Teachers will work together to insure they have a continuum so students can build on skills from early childhood to the fifth grade. Teachers, coaches, and the curriculum team will work together to align standards across the grades. Classes will work on the same skill at the same time and build on the skill introduced in previous grades to avoid gaps in knowledge by providing continuous coherent instruction.  Our school’s priority goal centers around the instructional core, specifically, the improvement of pedagogical practices to accelerate student achievement for all students including ELLs and SWD. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, coaches and teacher teams will work together to produce unit plans that are CCLS aligned, utilize the DOK level 3/4 activities and performance tasks, and engage students in higher order thinking and discussion that will result in 5% increase in students meeting proficiency levels on the ELA and Math state exams. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Common Planning, based on Danielson Framework: All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 All teachers, coaches, administrative team, curriculum specialist, consultant  Teachers will continue to participate in common planning teams engaging in inquiry to analyze student work to adjust teaching practice and instructional planning.  Teachers will continue to participate in common planning teams engaging in inquiry to plan Common Core aligned units to gain familiarity with key instructional practices.  Teachers will continue to participate in common planning teams engaging in inquiry to plan for shifts in instruction that display a variety of representations, models, and menus of choice to purposely allow for access to curricula or extend the learning.  Teachers will continue to participate in common planning teams engaging in inquiry to provide multiple assignments within each unit, tailored for students of different levels of achievement. Teachers will continue to implement various strategies to address the needs of all students through differentiated instruction to match tasks, activities, and learning practices. Curriculum team will meet with curriculum specialist and curriculum coach to help refine school curriculum. Sept. 2018-June 2019 Sept. 2018-June 2019 All students including ELLs and SWD One teacher per grade, curriculum coach Classroom teachers, coaches, administrative team, curriculum specialist, consultant Classroom teachers, coaches, administrative team, curriculum specialist, consultant Classroom teachers, coaches, administrative team, curriculum specialist, consultant A consultant will train and support teachers in CCLS and instructions. Classroom teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 Coach positions will be restructured. One coach will head weekly Professional Development sessions per grade and PDs on Mondays for those teachers who were rated ineffective or developing as a final rating last year or for the teachers who are All teachers, coaches, administrative team, curriculum 3 All teachers Sept. 2018-June 2019 rated ineffective or developing on any presented component of an observation this school year. All staff is invited to attend. Teachers and staff will continue engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home through parent workshops, family newsletters, Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Engagement Days. All Parents and Guardians Sept. 2018-June 2019 specialists, consultant All teachers, coaches, administrative team, curriculum specialists, consultant 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers and staff will continue engaging families and supporting their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core in order to support their children at home through parent workshops, family newsletters, Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Engagement Days. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers, administrative team, coaches, curriculum specialist, consultant  Schedule one common prep per week for common planning teams to meet  Restructure coach positions and have one coach head weekly PD sessions per grade and PD sessions on Mondays for those teachers who were rated ineffective or developing as a final rating last year or teachers who are rated ineffective or developing on any presented component of an observation this school year. All staff is invited to attend.  Professional Development one time a week per grade and school wide one time per week  Schedule common planning during Tuesdays “other professional work” time  Schedule curriculum team meetings  Schedule meetings with teachers, coaches, and consultant  Funding for curriculum specialist  Funding for consultant Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 4  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During 2018-2019 teacher teams will work together to use the data from pre-assessments to drive instruction and compare to post-assessments' data to track progress and demonstrate improved performance of all students including ELLs and SWD by 20%. Informal and formal observation reports, tracking progress of grade level CCLS   Comparative data analysis from every pre & post assessment  Grade-Level checklist that outlines all Primary and Secondary CCLS for every inter-disciplinary thematic unit  Units of study that exhibit Understanding by Design (UBD) precepts   All observations and data will be reviewed in February 2018 to track and review progress Improved performance of all students including ELLs, and SWD, as evidenced by interim assessments Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Pre and post benchmark assessments in ELA and Math Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  According to our MOLP rating, high expectations are consistently provided to teachers and families through ongoing communication and collaboration and establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations and are connected to college and career readiness. We will continue to build on that with continued common planning so teacher teams can work together to implement activities that align to the academic and social growth of all students. Based on MOTP, it was evident that not all teachers were differentiating. Many of our classrooms have been incorporating student-centered lessons and activities. When we are able to see that the increase of MOTP in domain 3, we have seen an increase in student performance on state assessments.  Throughout our school a positive tone encourages a safe and orderly learning environment for students, adults, and bridges school communities resulting in student academic and personal improvement. Based on feedback derived from a parent survey sent home during this past school year, the majority of parents expressed parent noted that the school does an effective job at maintaining a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, support, and challenged by their teacher and peers. In addition our recent PPR Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will implement student-centered lesson activities that are differentiated and aligned to the academic and social growth of all students. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will continue to use data to identify instructional priorities leveraged by the Danielson Framework for Teaching to set clear expectations and ensure academic and social success through meaningful work products. Teachers will focus on strengthening their questioning techniques embedding questions for multiple levels of thinking to better prompt students interpretive and critical thinking. Teachers will demonstrate consistency of effective instructional approaches and a variety of questioning and discussion techniques across the grades utilizing Webb’s DOK. Teachers will continue to participate in common planning teams engaging in inquiry to provide multiple assignments within each unit, which is tailored for students of different levels of achievement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept. 2018-June 2019 All teachers, coaches, administrative team Sept. 2018-June 2019 All teachers, coaches, administrative team Sept. 2018-June 2019 All teachers, coaches, administrative team Sept. 2018-June 2019 All teachers, coaches, administrative team All teachers and all students including ELLs and SWD All teachers and all students including ELLs and SWD All teachers and all students including ELLs and SWD All teachers and all students including ELLs and SWD How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Families are invited into the school at different times during the year to watch and take part in lessons taught. Numerous parent workshops are provided monthly to better support their children at home. Families are given different supportive instructional technologies that they children can access at home to help them further their understanding of what they are learning in school. 7  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  All teachers, coaches, administrative team  Schedule one common prep per week per grade for common planning teams to meet  Schedule professional development one time per week for each grade and one a week for those who are required to go and for anyone who chooses to attend, during the day and after school (per session)  Restructure coach positions and have one coach head weekly PD’s per grade and PD’s on Mondays for those teachers who were rated ineffective or developing as a final rating last year or teachers who are rated ineffective or developing on any presented component of observation this school year. All staff is invited to attend. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Administrative observations of questioning and discussion techniques  Administrative observations of effective instructional approaches across the grades utilizing Webb’s DOK   All observations and data will be reviewed in February 2019 to review progress and make necessary changes. Informal and formal observation reports, tracking progress of grade level CCLS Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Danielson Framework will be used to evaluate and support teachers in their understanding and knowledge of student-centered instruction. Teachers will be given support and professional development on building this area of need in order to support their students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  According to our MOLP rating, across the vast majority of classrooms, instructional practices are aligned to the curricula, which reflect and support school wide beliefs about how students learn best. Student work products and discussions reflect high levels of student thinking, participation, and ownership. This year, our curriculum team will continue to work with a curriculum coach and curriculum specialist to help refine the curriculum. Teachers and coaches will also work with a consultant who trains and supports them in instructions and CCLS.  Our school creates a positive tone that encourages a safe and orderly learning environment for all students including ELLs and SWD, adults, and bridges school communities resulting in student academic and personal improvement. We do this with our school motto, “Be safe, be smart, and be prepared for tomorrow”. Students see teachers as role models. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers are committed to the improvement of their pedagogical practice and success of the school through a community of sharing, learning, and growing. They continue to collaborate weekly engaging in a variety of professional learning structures including Tuning Tuesday, which enhances student work analysis, common planning (minimum of two hours per week in Kindergarten through third grade and five hours a week for fourth and fifth grade), and attend a minimum of 2 hours of professional development which will lead to increased uniformity among the grades and continued improvement with a minimum of a 5% gain in effective/highly effective practices of MOTP components 3B, 3C, and 3D. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide push-in teacher support for small group instruction in English Language Arts 3 to 8 times a week. All students including ELLs and SWD in grades 3-5 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, AIS support teachers, ELLs teachers, resource room teachers Invite at-risk students in grades 3-5 to English Language Arts after-school program At-risk students in grades 3-5 January 2019-April 2019 Classroom teachers, coaches, data specialist Common Planning  Teachers align differentiated instruction within their common planning based on multiple data tools.  Utilize inter-disciplinary, grade-level thematic units to track student progress of NYS CCLS Provide parent support through evening workshops focusing on skills and strategies in preparation the New York State English Language Arts Assessment. All students including ELLs and SWD Sept. 2018- June 2019 All teachers, coaches, administrative team, curriculum specialist, consultant All students and parents/guardians including ELLs and SWD January 2019- April 2019 Teachers, coaches, administrative team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There are monthly parent workshops in which teachers and parents work together to help increase a collaboration with families. Our Parent Coordinator and volunteer teachers work together to plan and deliver these workshops. Teachers use different forms of technology to communicate with families. They include Class Dojo, Remind, Skedula, and beginning of unit lesson topics with information on they can help their parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0   Teachers, coaches, administrative team, data specialist, curriculum specialist, consultant, AIS support teachers, resources room teachers  Schedule push-in support 3-8 times a week for students in grades 3-5  Common planning scheduled one time per week for each grade  Professional Development scheduled one time per week per grade and one time a week for all staff  Grade-wide data conferences scheduled a minimum of three times a year to discuss data and progress of students in grade and next steps to take  Individual teacher conferences scheduled a minimum of three times a year to discuss progress of students in class and next steps to take  Funding for AIS push-in support for grades 3-5  Funding for after-school programs  Funding for materials for after-school programs  Funding for curriculum specialist  Funding for consultant  Funding for Family Workshop Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Administrative team, data specialist, and teachers will meet to discuss progress of students in classes and grade  Results of thematic unit pre and post assessments aligned the NYS CCLS  Results of teacher generated assessments  Results of math unit assessments  Results of pre and post ELA assessments  All data will be reviewed in February 2019 to track and review progress Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. During the Tuning Tuesdays (PLCs), teachers work in groups and must provide documentation to evaluate trends, progress, and data. This documentation is then uploaded onto the schools Drive in which it is monitored and evaluated by building leaders. 1  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In our school, across classroom and grades, teachers regularly use common assessments to check student understanding, and student self-assessment, thus informing instructional adjustments to meet all student needs including ELLs and SWD. Our school utilizes periodic assessments such as the measures of student learning (MOSL) to sustain the learning expectations. Teachers also use shared assessments to measure content areas that are embedded in the school’s thematic units of study and use the results to monitor student improvement. Data from 2015-2016 State Assessments show there was a 13.3% increase in levels 3 and 4 in ELA and 9.2 % increase in levels 3 and 4 in Math and data from 2016-2017 State Assessments show there was a 1.9% increase in levels 3 and 4 in ELA and 3.1 % increase in levels 3 and 4 in Math. This year we will continue to use the MOSL and improve on teacher shared assessments by updating thematic units with help of curriculum coach, curriculum team, curriculum specialist, and a consultant. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. We have established teachers as stakeholders through distributive leadership. Teachers participate in various committees in order to be part of the decision-making process. This builds trust and rapport through collaboration. By June, 2019, 100% of all staff will be a member of at least one instructional committee that is responsible for school-based decision making, including: Grade Leader, School Leadership Team, Reading Curriculum Committee, Writing Curriculum Committee, Mathematics Curriculum Committee, Science Curriculum Committee, Measure of Student Learning Committee, or the Professional Development Committee. Teachers will decide which committees to be part of by the end of September, 2018. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers provide push-in teacher support for small group instruction in ELA for grades 3-5. All students in grades Sept. 2018-June 2019 3-5 including ELLs and SWD All students including ELLs and SWD Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers in grades 3-5, ELLs teachers, AIS support, resource room teachers All teachers, coaches, administrative team, curriculum specialist, consultant All students including ELLs and SWD Sept. 2018-June 2019 Classroom teachers, coaches, data specialist, administrative team All students and parents/guardians including ELLs and SWD January 2019-April 2019 Teachers, coaches, administrative team Common Planning  Teachers align differentiated instruction within their common planning based on multiple data tools.  Teachers continue to work in teams on refining school’s curricula and academic tasks so lessons provide suitable access for all students strengthening the level of engagement and deepening student reasoning. Data  Conduct individual teacher conferences to discuss data and progress of students in class and next steps to take.  Grade-wide data conferences to discuss data and progress of students in grade and next steps to take. Provide parent support through evening workshops focusing on skills and strategies in preparation for the New York State English Language Arts Assessment. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have established numerous committees in which different teachers take on a leadership role. One of these committees is a PTA Teacher Committee. They attend PTA meetings and are available to meet with parents at this 4  time in order to address concerns and questions. As a school, we are a continuously looking for parent volunteers for different events and school wide activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers, coaches, administrative team, data specialist, curriculum specialist, consultant  Grade-wide data conferences scheduled a minimum of three times a year to discuss student performance and next steps to take  Individual teacher conferences scheduled a minimum of three times a year to discuss student performance and next steps to take  Schedule push-in support 3-8 times a week for grades 3-5  Funding for AIS Support  Funding for curriculum specialist  Funding for consultant  Funding for Family Workshop Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Administrative team, data specialist, and teachers will meet to discuss progress of students in classes and grade  Results of interim assessments  Results of thematic pre and post assessments  Results of teacher generated assessments  All observations and data will be reviewed in February 2019 to review progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School leadership meets with different committees to discuss findings from their teams in order to disseminate information to the entire school community. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to our MOLP rating, our school provides a safe, nurturing, and welcoming learning environment for the entire school community. This year we will continue to partner with families to have more communication to enhance student learning and success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, our school will continue to enhance reciprocal communication with students’ families by creating additional opportunities to convey information centered on student learning and success which will result in a 5% increase in parent involvement in Family Workshops. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? There will be a weekly open door policy on Tuesdays from 2:20 to 3:00 pm for parents/guardians to speak with teachers about any concerns they may have. All students and parents/ Sept. 2018-June 2019 All teachers guardians including ELLs and SWD Provide parent support through evening workshops focusing on skills and strategies in preparation of the New York State English Language Arts and Mathematics Assessments. All students and parents/ January 2019-April 2019 All teachers, coaches, administrative team guardians including ELLs and SWD Invite students and parents of ELLs to Saturday Academy January 2018 to May 2018. ELLs students and parents January 2019-May 2019 Teachers, coaches, ELLs teachers, administrative team guardians of ELLs Parent coordinator will conduct parent workshops to enhance their understanding of their children’s learning. ELLs students and parents/ Sept. 2018- June 2019 Parent coordinator guardians of ELLs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Bronx House, Montifore Health Community Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7   All teachers, administrative team, coaches, parent coordinator  Funds for Family Workshops  Funds for Saturday Academy Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  Attendance/sign in sheets from Family Workshops and meetings  Parent/guardian survey results when program is over  In February 2019 we will review attendance of workshops to look for progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We are in constant contact with the parent coordinator to check attendance at meetings. The SLT will be creating and distributing a parent survey. The SLT conduct an item analysis to gain pertinent feedback to assess areas needs. They will then create a plan on how to address areas of need. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Tier III/RTI ● one on one ● during day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.)  Grades 4-5 (September) previous years NYS ELA Assessment results  K-5 (all year) MOSL results, pre and post assessments, teacher observation ● during day ● during day – is an intense academic intervention layer/tier focused on identifying and providing the delivery of services to at-risk students who have not had academic success with other traditional interventions Tier III – consists of research based instruction and interventions and constant progress monitoring. It examines the results (data) in a group setting (CST) to assist in making educational decisions for the at-risk child KaplanAdvantage-consists of 5 units to support literacy instruction, re-teaches content, supports ELL’s, and ● small group ● small group 9  provides extension for high performing students; includes Test Companion component to help students build their test-taking skills and strategies Preparing for Excellence -is designed to support the regular classroom instruction by zeroing in on skills that will make students successful; lessons divided into 2 parts - Reading Comprehension and Writing Target Reading Intervention - provides students with practice in reading strategies and skills to build their comprehension and fluency 100 Book Challenge- an independent reading program that allows children to build stamina, decoding skills, reading comprehension, and fluency on their own level and at their own pace; promotes a love of reading ● small group ● small group ● whole class, one on one conferences ● small group and whole class ● small group and whole class ● during day ● during day ● during day ● during day ● during day ● during day 0  Fletcher's Place - (Grade K) - a phonics program that utilizes tactile and kinesthetic activities in order to promote sound-symbol correspondence Reading Revolution -(Grade 1) - a phonics program that utilizes tactile and kinesthetic activities in order to promote sound-symbol correspondence ● small group Awards - a program that builds language, phonics, and vocabulary skills Fundations (Grades K-2) - a step by step, phonics-based program designed to teach and support decoding, fluency, letter formation, and vocabulary through the use of visual aides and hands-on materials Wilson - a step by step, phonics-based program designed to teach and support decoding, fluency, and vocabulary through the use of visual aides and hands-on materials ● small group ● small group ● small group ● whole class ● during day ● during day ● during day ● during day 1 ● during day  ● small group and whole class ● during day ● during day ● small group and whole class ● small group and whole class Words Their Way- a phonics-based program designed to teach and boost decoding skills through the use of games, visual aides, and hands-on materials Ready NY CCLS–English Language Arts Practice -a review program for the CCLS for ELA, which consists of two practice tests of 73 ELA questions (63 multiple choice, 8 short response, and 2 extended response questions), and is a program designed to provide students with additional practice of test-taking skills ad strategies. K-3 NYCReady Gen Phonics -a phonics program designed to teach and support decoding skill, fluency, letter formation, and vocabulary development. Time for Kids– a supplementary reading program that uses content area reading materials to help students improve their reading 2  Mathematics  Grades 4-5 (September) previous years NYS Math Assessment results  K-5 (all year) MOSL results, pre and post assessments, teacher observation comprehension skills utilizing the 3 – part framework of reading process Time for Kids Exploring Writing– a supplementary writing program to teach and support writing skills in both fiction and non-fiction through the use of high – interest reading envision Math Common Core – a focused and coherent mathematics curriculum which provides in-depth instruction on a limited number of important categories of mathematics content; directly aligned to CCLS domains and content specific standards and clusters; contains problem solving and differentiation materials embedded within each topic covered Crosswalk Coach Plus – supplemental test prep material geared at remediating problem areas Common Core Standards Practice Workbook -designed to reinforce math ● small group and whole class ● during day ● small group ● after school ● small group ● during day ● during day ● small group and whole class 3  Science Social Studies  Grade 5 (September) previous years NYS Science Assessment results  K-5 (all year) pre and post assessments, teacher observation pre and post assessments, teacher observation small group and whole class during day  small group and whole class  during day  during day  small group and whole class  small group and whole class  during day  small group and whole class  during day strands from New York Common Core Standards Ready New York Mathematics Instruction (Grades 3-5) -a supplemental resource designed to support math instruction and provide opportunities for re-teaching Spatial-Temporal (ST) Math Program - a game based instructional software (K-12) designed to boost math comprehension through visual learning using iPads  Non-fiction text based books  Time for Kids -uses content area reading materials to help students improve their reading comprehension skills utilizing the 3 – part framework of reading process  Non-fiction text based books Time for Kids -uses content area reading materials to help students improve their reading comprehension skills utilizing the 3 – part 4  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  IEP mandated  Staff indentifies students at-risk  Parent request  Request from outside agencies based on Tier 1-3  Whole school services  Whole school based off attendance data – select students framework of reading process ● Advisory- character education and anti-bullying ●Lunch Room Conflict Resolution ●Guidance Assembly ●Respect for All Week ●Attendance Assembly ● whole group ● during day ● small group ● during day ● whole school ● during day ● during day ● whole school ● during day ● whole school ●Group Counseling- character education ● small group ●Individual Counseling- varies based on individual needs ● during day ● during day ● one on one ● during day ● Second Step– anti-violence/ ● whole school character education program that utilizes visuals and role playing to help children learn to deal with their emotions ● during day ● whole class 5  ● during day ● during day Classroom Guidance Lessons ● small group ● small group Child Study Team -provides strategies to classroom teachers and assigns students Tier III/RTI intervention as needed Save Room - conflict resolution based, problem solving for discipline based behaviors 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Our current number of the STH is 134. This includes students in shelters and doubled up. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We have established many services for our STH population. The school provides free breakfast every morning. The school assists the parent in obtaining a bus for the child, and the interim provides metro cards for the child. At risk counseling is offered to the child. A book bag and school supplies are given to each child. Various fundraisers and drives are used to support the students with food, clothes, toys, etc. Outreach and referrals to community based organizations are established. The parent coordinator also provides support to the parents of the STH students. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. o As of now, the faculty members are HQT. o In new efforts to hire HQT, the same interview questions are used for each prospective teacher. A panel that consists of teachers, coaches, and administrators carefully reviews each candidate’s portfolio. o Newly-hired teachers are appointed a mentor and are provided with a support system in each grade. o At the end of each academic year, class and teacher data is closely analyzed prior to teachers’ assignment for the new school year. o Weekly Professional Development Sessions are conducted on each grade based on the needs of the staff. o Weekly Professional Development is offered once a week for teachers who were either rated developing or ineffective as final rating last year and teachers who are rated ineffective or developing on any presented component from observations during the 2018-2019 school year. All staff members are invited to attend this Professional Development. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Professional development at PS 105 is based on data; is derived from the experience, expertise and needs of the recipients; reflects best practices in sustained job-embedded learning; and incorporates knowledge of how adults learn. Professional development at PS 105 expands educators’ content knowledge and the knowledge and skills necessary to provide developmentally appropriate instructional strategies and assess student progress.  Professional development for the 2018-2019 school year will begin with a needs assessment. A committee of teachers, coaches and administrators will analyze the results to create monthly Professional Development Calendars. Professional Development will be held weekly for grade level teams. Additional professional development will be 9  offered on Monday afternoons for teachers with a TIP plan and open to all teachers who would like to further their professional learning in the topic being addressed. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.).  Parents bring students to the school beginning in January before Kindergarten  Psycho Educational Assessment of all students zones for Kindergarten at PS 105  A social update is done  In some cases, someone may visit the Pre-Kindergarten class for observations  Information is gathered from child’s teacher about services currently receiving  An IEP, meeting is held at PS 105 for what services are needed with the parent, current teacher, and current service providers 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  A MOSL committee will be selected to include a representative from each grade level and out of classroom teachers. The committee will meet a few times to discuss each grade levels MOSL options. The committee will then make a selection based on feedback from grade level teams and MOSL committee. 0   The curriculum committee works to ensure all curriculum objectives are aligned to grade-specific common core standards. The committee provides ongoing evaluation of curriculum guides and updates the assessments for school wide units of study as needed. All classroom teachers and out of classroom teachers participate in the development, design, and implementation of grade level assessments for their units of study. Assessments include pre and post assessments, formative, and summative assessments. Teachers participate in creating performance tasks and evaluate student performance through the performance tasks. All assessment designs are based on the common core state standards’ expectations, curriculum taught and on the data collected from a variety of assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Section 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 1,152,132.00 321,104.00 31,384.00 0 6,957,297.00 X X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 1  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Senator Abraham Bernstein, PS 105, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Senator Abraham Bernstein, PS 105 will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 3  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 4  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Senator Abraham Bernstein, PS 105 iin compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student 5  achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 6  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 7  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 8  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 140 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 11 3 8 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III Saturday Academy for ELLs P.S. 105X is a K-5 school that provides a Dual Language and Freestanding English as a New Language Program (ENL) for 296 English Language Learners, which represents 26.9% of our student body. We will begin our Saturday Academy program for ELLs starting on January 12th, 2019 and ending May 11th, 2019 excluding winter and spring break. Our parents will be notified in their preferred language of communication. It is anticipated that approximately 140 students will participate in this program with English as the language of instruction. Students will receive home language support from teachers in Spanish, Arabic, Albanian and French, as well as in peer grouping with similar languages. The subjects to be taught will focus on developing literacy skills and language development. Our sessions will take place on fourteen(14) Saturdays, between January 12th, and May 11th, 2019 during the hours of 9:00am-12:00pm for three hours of direct instruction. The selection of ELLs for the Saturday Academy is as follows: Newcomers, SIFE, length of time in an English language school system and results of 2017-2018 NYSESLAT. The grades serviced will be K-5. There will be one(1) parent group taught by one teacher and seven (7) groups of approximately 15-20 students: one kindergarten, one first grade, one second grade, two third grade, one fourth grade and one fifth grade. In addition, Integrated ENL will be provided by three(3) ENL/Bilingual licensed teachers in each class for 45 minutes to work with the content area teachers. Each teacher will teach with an instructional focus of developing literacy and language skills using various language supports, such as, explicit vocabulary instruction, graphic organizers, charting, building background knowledge and experiences, responses to literature, letter writing, and visuals to stimulate discussion. Amongst the resources used exclusively for the program are the research based, “On Our Way to English Newcomer Kit, Levels I and II”, Language Power grades K-2 levels A&B and grades 3-5 levels A&B and “English to a Beat”. The following on-line sites using Smartboard are used to further support and blend technology during instructional time: brainpopesl.com, starfall.com, Imagine Learning and awardreadingonline.com. All records related to the program, including attendance, and parent communication are sent home in parents' preferred language and are kept in a binder by the supervising Assistant Principal. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 1  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: All Title III Program teachers will participate in one hour of professional development session during the Saturday Academy Program starting January 12th, 2019 to May 11th, 2019 excluding winter and spring break from 8:00am-9:00am for a total of fourteen(14) Saturdays. The rationale for selecting these topics is based on teacher feed back requesting targeted and consistent professional development in order to provide the best support to our ELL population. January 12th, 8:00am-9:00am: Analyzing the curriculum, presented by Assistant Principal attended by eleven teachers. January 19th, 8:00am-9:00am: Training Awards program and review of Awards websites, presented by Assistant Principal and attended by eleven teachers. January 26th, 8:00am-9:00am: Training Language Power program, presented by Assistant Principal and attended by eleven teachers. February 2nd, 8:00am-9:00am Developing effective content and language objectives, presented by ENL teacher and attended by eleven teachers. February 9th, 8:00am-9:00am: Scaffolding instruction for ELLs, presented by ENL teacher attended by eleven teachers. March 2nd at 8:00am-9:00am: Scaffolding language using Depth of Knowledge(DOK) presented by Assistant Principal attended by eleven teachers. March 9th at 8:00am-9:00am: Connecting oral language with written language, presented by Assistant Principal attended by eleven teachers. March, 16th at 8:00am-9:00am: Developing questioning and discussion techniques, presented by Assistant Principal attended by eleven teachers. March 23rd, 8:00am-9:00am: A discussion on four modalities of NYSESLAT presented by ENL teacher attended by eleven teachers. March 30th, 8:am-9:00: Looking at NYSESLAT data, presented by ENL teacher and Assistant Principal attended by eleven teachers. April 6th, at 8:00am-9:00am: NYSESLAT speaking and listening components and strategies, presented by Assistant Principal and ENL teacher attended by eleven teachers. April 13th, at 8:00am-9:00am: NYSESLAT reading and writing components and strategies, presented by Assistant Principal and ENL teacher attended by eleven teachers. May 4th at 8:00am-9:00am: NYSESLAT- Analyzing rubric for writing a short constructed response presented by Assistant principal and ENL teacher attended by eleven teachers. May 11th at 8:00am-9:00am: NYSESLAT- Analyzing rubric for writing an extended constructed response presented by Assistant principal and ENL teacher attended by eleven teachers. All attendance, agendas,feed back forms and any other related documents are kept in a binder by the supervising Assistant Principal. The additional professional development expense over the allocated amount is at no cost to Title III. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: The ENL class for parents will be differentiated based on English proficiency level of the parents. We will offer the parents three levels: Beginner/survival English, literacy development, and conversational English. The rationale for selecting these topics is based on school knowledge of our parent groups based on information gathered by our parent coordinator and during our ELL parent meeting. The parent class will be offered starting on January 12th, 2019 and ending May 11, 2019 excluding winter and spring break from 9:00am-12:00pm for a total of fourteen (14)) Saturdays. January 12th, at 9:00am-12:00pm: Introduction and establishing dialogue presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. January 19th, at 9:00am-12:00pm: Exploring our diversity, presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. January 26th at 9:00am-12:00pm: Exploring and building vocabulary and cognates, presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. February 2nd, 9:00am-12:00pm: Introducing word families and sight words, presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. February 9th, 9:00am-12:00pm: Word families and sight words-Part II, presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. March 2nd, 9:00am-12:00pm: Review and discussion of NYSESLAT parent brochure in parents' preferred language. March 9th, 9:00am-12:00pm: NYSESLAT Speaking and Listening Activities, presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. March 16th, 9:00am-12:00pm: NYSESLAT Reading and writing Activities presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. March 23rd, 9:00am-12:00pm: Exploring technology- ENL instructional websites- presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. March 30th, 9:00am-12:00pm: Exploring Technology-Part II-presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. April 6th, 9:00am-12:00pm: Oral language development emphasizing grammar rules and basic writing skills, presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. April 13th, 9:00am-12:00pm: Oral language development-Part II, presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. May 4th, 9:00am-12:00pm: Using language function asking and answering questions, presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. May 11th 9:00am-12:00pm: Summarizing and Making connections to our learning, presented by one teacher and attended by 30 parents. Parents will be informed of classes in the same invitation prepared for students and sent home in their preferred language of communication. All agendas, attendance and other related documents are kept in a binder by the supervising Assistant Principal. The additional professional development expense over the allocated amount is at no cost to Title III. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 3  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Senator Abraham Bernstein School Borough Bronx School Number 105 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Christopher Eustace Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ana DeLaCruz / ENL Coordinator Teacher/Subject Area Lawrence Holz /ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider Jennifer Volpe Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Evelyn Alier Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Usama Eldawaity Parent Coordinator Yolanda Ayala Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 4 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1107 5 Total number of ELLs 292 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 26.38%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown Program TBE Lang. Spanish School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-2018 K 1 2 1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Tot # TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Paste response to questions here: Ongoing assessment is designed and implemented to collect evidence of students’ learning and/or needs. Results drive instruction. All our students take part in various formative assessments. All our students' early literacy skills in grades K-2 are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, in English and Spanish for our second grade Transitional Bilingual class. All grades K-5 conduct reading and comprehension assessment(running record), conferring notes, quick checks in math and teacher anecdotal notes. All teachers in grades K-5, use teacher created pre- and post assessments based on grade-specific literacy units of studies administered at the beginning and end of each unit. This data informs our school’s instructional plan by providing the information needed that will help guide instruction and establish focused intervention services in students’ areas of need. 6  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All teachers with ELLs in their classes, as well as ENL providers, use the RLAT report and review all NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results at the beginning of the academic year to determine needs and plan for instruction. The EDAT tool has been introduced to selected teachers and will become part of our data analysis system. All teachers participate in grade-specific weekly Common Planning periods to plan and elaborate on unit specific aims and additional scaffolds using Universal Design for Learning guidelines. In addition, all teachers participate in weekly grade specific professional development(PD) above and beyond our weekly Monday PDs focusing on curriculum and teacher needs. Teachers administer running records, conferring notes, take anecdotal notes and maintain portfolio. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Paste response to question here: The first summative/formal ELLs assessment is the NYSITELL, based on preset criteria, and is a measure of English language proficiency for students tested for the first time. The NYSESLAT, also a language proficiency test, determines progress, and functions in addition to the new regulation for student in grades3-5 scoring level 3 or 4 on ELA and expanding on the NYSESLAT as the exit criteria from ENL entitlement. These two assessments are unique to our ELLs population and are given in addition to any other grade wide standardized test. The MOSL is also administered . Other summative assessments for all grades include pre and post individual unit assessment as well as cumulative pre and post benchmark assessment based on unit of studies. In math, teachers administer end of unit assessments as well as cumulative unit exams. The information is gathered to show students’ progress and or needs and helps in substantiating the effectiveness of programs in place for ELLs and how and where additional support is needed. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The summative and formative data gathered is used to address intervention and inform instruction. The following is the structures we have in place: Students are placed in differentiated groups and receive focus targeted instruction in area of need from both the ENL provider and/or classroom teacher. Both Teachers have ongoing conversations during articulation time and weekly common planning time. Parents are contacted to discuss need and how student can best be supported at home. If student continues to struggle, then conversation takes place with grade Assistant Principal for further conversation with teacher and parent to discuss further intervention under our RTI program. In addition, we use our Title III Saturday Academy Program to offer additional instructional intervention in speaking, listening, reading and writing support. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: Our school is constantly analyzing data to guide instruction for all students and adjust programming. The Response to Intervention(RTI) plan for grades K-5 in our school follows Tier 1-3 core elements and uses as screeners for identification and ongoing assessment Fountas and Pinnell(F&P), WADE assessment from Wilson, conferencing, formative and summative assessment, quick checks for understanding and relevant teacher/student feedback. At Tier 1, students received 90minutes(Balanced Literacy Block) of uninterrupted literacy instruction in classroom by ENL provider and classroom teacher. Instruction is whole class, follow by flexible groupings formed to support students in developing skills and strategies required to successfully master the core curriculum. At Tier 2 , targeted small groups receive assessment-based intensive intervention by a Wilson trained teacher for those students that were not responsive to Tier 1. At Tier 3, individual students receive assessment-based high intensity intervention by a Wilson trained teacher for those students that were not responsive to Tier 2. At Tiers 2-3 instruction occurs outside of the classroom 3-5x a week for 6 weeks cycle and re-evaluated. It is in addition to what is being provided during literacy instruction. At each tier, ELLs students are provided adequate support using ENL methodology and Universal Design for Learning(UDL) framework is used to guide educational practice. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 7  Paste response to question here: In analyzing the data patterns across proficiency levels and grades using the RLAT, the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL information reveals that the students continue to demonstrate language development gains from grade to grade. As students continue to take the NYSESLAT, more students are moving to the Transition, Expanding and Commanding. As per the ELL Data Analysis Tool(EDAT) Approximately 45% of our last year’s Kindergarteners taking the NYSESLAT for the first time Spring 2016 moved from entering to either emerging or transitioning. The overall NYSESLAT proficiency results recorded for this year’s K students are based on the NYSITELL administered Fall 2016. Grades 1-5 overall NYSESLAT proficiency results demonstrate students' progress as they move up in English proficiency level. Students in Grades 1-5 scoring at entering levels includes those in the program less that three years which is 92% of our current ENL population. However, as per the EDAT, more targeted, focused instruction needs to be provided to 28% of our NYSESLAT 2016 test takers that remained at the same proficiency levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Teachers with ELL students meet with their ENL provider and or the Coordinator to review NYSITELL and NYSESLAT results. All teachers are involved in analyzing data during weekly PD and more time is been devoted to decompose ELL data using the RLAT and more teachers are been introduced to the EDAT. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste response to questions here: Our total student population is 1,107 students, of which 26.38% represents our English Language Learners (ELLs). ELL population at PS 105 counts 292 students from Kindergarten through Fifth grade. Our school offers a Freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) Program and Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) Spanish in second grade. The Freestanding ENL Program in grades K-5 consists of three instructional program models: Self-Contained ENL classes, a Stand-alone ENL model, and an Integrated ENL model. The stand-alone ENL model is instruction to develop English language skills so that students can be successful in content courses. Activities that support this model are: explicit vocabulary instruction, charting, building g background knowledge and experiences, visuals to stimulate discussion and graphic organizers. The Integrated ENL instruction builds English language skills through content area instruction. The focus is content area subject matter and English language development using ENL strategies. Our self-contained ENL classrooms are heterogeneous and our mainstream classrooms with Integrated ENL and or Stand-alone ENL services may be heterogeneous or homogeneous in their organization. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: Our Transitional Bilingual program is currently offered in second grade and based on the language development of students in the class, instruction is provided using 50% in English and 50% in the home language. Home language is used in mathematics, home language arts, writing and science. Students received their mandated ENL instructional minutes from their licensed bilingual teacher. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: N/A 8  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our Transitional Bilingual program is currently offered in second grade and based on the language development of students in the class, instruction is provided using 50% in English and 50% in the home language. Home language is used in mathematics, home language arts, writing and science. On a weekly basis they receive, math 450minutes, science 90 minutes, writing 90 minutes and home language arts 135 minutes. Students receive their mandated ENL instructional minutes from their licensed bilingual teacher using Stand-Alone and Integrated models within her classroom based on students' English proficiency levels. In our Freestanding ENL Program,(Self-Contained ENL classes, Stand-alone ENL and Integrated ENL models) students receive all instruction in English and ENL instruction is Stand-alone ENL and Integrated ENL in ELA or other content area. The number of ENL instructional units received is based on CR Part 154.2 regulations and students’ level of language proficiency as determined by the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. Students receive their mandated instructional services in Stand-alone ENL and/or Integrated ENL/ELA and other content area based on English proficiency level. In the Freestanding ENL Program students are at different English Proficiency levels. Students at the entering and emerging levels receive two(2) units of study per week(360 min.) The 360 minutes for entering level students is comprised of 180minutes of Stand-alone ENL and 180minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA. The 360 minutes for emerging level students is comprised of 90 minutes of Stand-alone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of Stand-alone ENL or Integrated ENL/ content area based on students' language and academic needs. Students at the transitioning and expanding levels receive one(1) unit of study per week. The 180 minutes for transitioning level students is comprised of 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of Integrated ENL/content area based on academic needs. The 180 minutes for expanding level students is comprised of Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area based on academic needs. Our commanding students(Former ELLs) receive 90 minutes per week of Integrated ENL/ELA. We review our monthly ELL Data Update Report (EDUR) to ensure that all our mandated ENL students are appropriately identified and programmed in STARS accordingly as per CR Part 154.2 regulations. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: Our Freestanding ENL program serve students in the entering, emergent,transitioning, expanding and commanding levels. They receive the mandated minutes per week of ENL instruction aligned with ELA Common Core Learning Standards using Stand-alone ENL and/or integrated ENL based on students' proficiency level. All students received the mandated 90, 180 or 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction aligned with ELA Common Core Learning Standards. In all programs, including our Transitional Bilingual, when content area instruction is taught in English, ENL strategies are consistently used. Scaffolding is implemented to help them meet the linguistic and academic demands of what is being taught. This structure is deliberate to ensure access and it is gradually removed when the students become skilled enough and ready to manage the content on their own. In addition, differentiated groups are formed based on individual students' needs. These groups may be teacher lead for focus and targeted instruction and others are more student centered. These strategies are implemented in all classroom and are part of the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) which offers the framework for guiding our educational practice. In addition, home language support is offered as necessary. Our Transitional Bilingual program(TBE) as well, uses the same scaffolding structures when necessary during content instruction in the home language. In the TBE program students receive instruction in Spanish during math, science, writing and home language arts. On a weekly basis they receive, Math 450 minutes , Science 90minutes, writing 90 minutes and home language arts 135minutes. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to question here: Spanish speaking students that are NYSITELL tested for the first time and entitled to ENL services are also tested with the Spanish LAB to determine language dominance. Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, in Spanish for our first grade Transitional Bilingual class. All our math curriculum unit test and assessment are available in Spanish. In addition, 9  content area testing materials available in specific native languages are ordered for state assessments as well as NYC pre and post assessment and simulations. Students with lower incidence languages in which translated testing materials are not available are offered oral translations. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to questions here: Our ELL subgroups are offered support to help differentiate their instruction: SIFE and Newcomers: Title III funds are used to provide these students with supplemental instruction. A Saturday Academy program for our SIFE/Newcomers in grades K-5. The focus is oral language and vocabulary development. In addition, home language support is offered to our newcomer Spanish speakers in mathematics. Furthermore, students in grades 3, 4, and 5 after their first year of ENL services are invited to attend our after school program that meets twice a week focusing on ELA and math instruction. Developing and Long-Term ELLs: They receive focus and targeted instruction in math and ELA during our differentiation period based on assessments. They are also invited to attend our after school program that meets twice a week focusing on ELA and math instruction. All ELLs with one year or more of ENL services in grades 3, 4 and 5 also participate in our after school program. At the present, our school does not have any long term ELLs. Students that are not demonstrating progress on NYSESLAT are also invited to our Saturday program. Former ELLs: Our students reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT in grades 1-5 receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area for at least two years. These are students who had been identified as English language learners and subsequently exited from ELL status. In addition, for at least two years following the school year, they are eligible for certain specified testing accommodations. They are also invited to our after school program based on academic needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Paste response to question here: English Language Learner Students with Disabilities (ELL-SWD) participate in all school wide instructional programs and activities. Instructional materials are grade level specific and are implemented to provide academic content and making it comprehensible and accessible, through appropriate ENL strategies such as, Total Physical Response, Graphic organizers, vocabulary development and use of SMART Boards. Scaffolding structures and The Universal Design for Learning (UDL) as the framework are implemented to help accelerate English language development and make content comprehensible and accessible. In addition to school programs, such as, “enVisionMath”, “Award Reading”, “Language Power “Ready New York”, “Units of Study” at each grade level in reading and writing; and small reading groups using instructional level specific literacy materials across genres. They also participate in ELLs specific teaching programs. The following programs are ELLs specific: “On our Way to English”, English to a Beat” and “Into English”. The above programs focus on oral language, vocabulary development, developing reading and writing skills and developing academic content through non-fiction reading. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste response to question here: In order to meet the diverse needs of all ELL-SWD they are placed in classroom settings as recommended on their IEP. The students are placed in ICTs, Self-Contained SE, and mainstream setting receiving SETTS mandated services. They receive ENL mandated services using a combination of Stand-alone ENL and or Integrated ENL/ELA or other content area based on language proficiency level. During Stand-alone ENL, ELL-SWD participate in groups that include non-disabled peers. In 0  addition, they participate in physical education, music and drama program and after school programs. Furthermore, students in Self-Contained SE classrooms demonstrating progress in various academic areas are mainstreamed into an ICT setting to work collaboratively with non-disabled peers. Common Planning periods for both GE/SE are used to plan, to analyze data and continue to develop best teaching practices. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: The Balanced Literacy approach is used during the ENL and ELA instructional time in order to develop literacy skills through a number of activities. Common Core Learning Standards based instructional materials are provided to all of our ELLs to ensure literacy development. ELL teachers employ Interdisciplinary Teaching to integrate subject matter from two or more disciplines such as English and social studies, often using themes. For example, the content topics found in a shared read from Our Way to English, Into English, English to a Beat programs, become the vehicle of new language learning. Academic language is formally taught and continuously practiced in the instruction of all content areas during the literacy block for the understanding of grammar, syntax, and language mechanics as well as exemplified in research and textbooks. The teacher differentiates instruction by adjusting the academic language demands of lesson instruction in the following ways: modifying speech rate and tone; direct instruction of vocabulary and grammar; repeating key words and phrases; using context clues; modeling strategies and relating instruction to students’ background knowledge and experiences. They incorporate scaffolding techniques that can be removed as learners are able to demonstrate more proficiency and autonomy. Scaffolding support is contingent, collaborative and interactive. ELLs teachers incorporate cooperative collaborative grouping in their lessons which allows linguistic shared leadership by the learner, as well as social skills development. Another language empowering activity is Think/Pair/Share. In both activities, students with less English proficiency are interacting with more proficient students. The Balanced Literacy Block, allows the students to be taught and guarantees that students are taught heterogeneously, affording different modalities of learning, scaffolding techniques, and data driven instruction. These teaching strategies provide students with the opportunities to complete performance tasks and demonstrate task orientated knowledge attained within and outside the classroom. The Balanced Literacy approach is also used in our first grade Transitional Bilingual (Spanish) classroom. The above instructional approach applies to all our ELLs and additional specific intervention services to targeted subgroups are as mentioned under the specific subgroup. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Paste response to question here: This current school year as well as in prior years, students in grades K-5 participate in focus small group instruction during our daily reading and math differentiation period. In addition, they participate in the after-school program two times per week to improve literacy skills in reading, writing and math. These groups will include students required to take ELA after their first year of enrollment. We look forward to continue providing an after school program to second grade students that is available based on funding. ELLs in second grade participate in this program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Paste response to question here: There are no programs/services to be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Paste response to question here: ELLs enrolled for a year or more in grades 3-5 are invited to the after school program with the rest of student population twice a week for one and half hours each day to strengthen literacy and math skills. In addition, based on funding a second grade after school program is offered in which ELLs participate based on academic needs. Title III funding is focused on our Newcomers, SIFE and former ELLs students. The program meets on Saturdays for four hours. The focus of the program is to accelerate language development, build background knowledge and improve literacy skills with a focus on cross cultural awareness. The goal of all our programs is to support, develop,improve and enrich background knowledge, oral language, 1  cultural awareness, literacy skills and strategies and math skills. ELLs participate in all school programs and activities, such as art club, chorus, music, drama, computer,and gym. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Paste response to question here: Question: 12 Our literacy instruction for grades K-5 is based on units of studies. Our math curriculum for all grades uses “enVisionMath” program. Additional instructional materials, such as, “Award Reading”, “Language Power “Ready New York” and small reading groups using instructional level specific literacy materials across genres are used to support our ELLs. They also participate in ELLs specific teaching programs, such as: “On our Way to English”, English to a Beat” and “Into English”. The above programs focus on oral language, vocabulary development, developing reading and writing skills and developing academic content through non-fiction reading. The use of technology continues to strengthen the academic rigor already present in the classroom. Almost all of our classrooms are equipped with Smart Boards that have made teaching more interactive and has enhanced visual capabilities to help meet the learning needs of students’ with varying learning styles. In addition, our school currently participates in ST Math Program to improve math skills using technology for ELLs in first, second and third grade primarily SIFE students. Moving forward we will look at the feasibility of implementing ST Math with SIFE in fourth and fifth grade. This current year a school wide license was purchased for Imagine Learning. All classrooms use the program at a minimum of 20 minutes a day with each student having access to a chrome book. Teachers' professional periods allow us to discuss and ensure that appropriate technology components are incorporated in teachers’ planning and used in the classroom. In order to support planning and professional development, an ENL materials library is maintained by the ENL Team. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Paste response to question here: In order to support ELLs in our Freestanding ENL model, glossaries, direct translation dictionaries in various languages and Spanish translated testing materials in mathematics and science are used during school year to support ELLs. Native language support is offered by a certified bilingual teacher during mathematics instruction in grade 5. ELLs in the first grade Transitional Bilingual Program in Spanish, receive instruction from their licensed bilingual teacher in both English and Spanish throughout the instructional day. Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System, in Spanish is used for literacy as well as teacher made assessment. Our enVisionMath Program provides math assessments in Spanish for all grades. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Paste response to question here: All instructional materials and support services are grade specific and age appropriate. ELLs students are taught using content area materials at their grade level. In order to support students with various learning abilities and needs, small groups are formed to re-teach specific skills and strategies during our differentiation period. Leveled materials in literacy across genres are used during small group differentiated instruction. In mathematics, students are taught grade level content using grade appropriate enVisionMath Program and during differentiation students are grouped to meet their individual needs based on unit assessment and informal observation. All other content areas are age and grade level appropriate and presented using shared and read aloud. in order to support students at different instructional levels. As per CR Part 154.2, content area instruction will be done using integrated ENL . 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Paste response to question here: Question: 15 N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 2  Paste response to question here: At the present time, our school does not offer any activities before the beginning of the school year. Historically, funding permitting our ELLs including ELL-SWD that are not mandated to attend summer school are invited to the ELLs Summer in the City Enrichment Program. The goal of the program is to develop English language proficiency, focusing on oral language and vocabulary development; in addition to math support. At the start of the school year and throughout the school year during the school day, our Newcomers ELLs depending on need are part of a focus subgroup and receive stand-alone ENL services in order to develop language specific content using Rigby’s Newcomers Program and conducted by ENL/Bilingual teacher. Our Newcomers, also participate in our ELLs Saturday Academy Program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Paste response to question here: In our elementary school K-5 setting we do not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Paste response to question here: All teachers of ELLs hold the appropriate teaching certificates and use their knowledge of research based concepts to foster students’ language acquisition. To enrich such knowledge, teachers take opportunities to attend professional development sessions at school, Field Support Center and at NYCDOE sites. Under new Part 154.2, these professional development opportunities are specific to the needs of ELLs and include, co-teaching strategies, and integrating language and content instruction: The required percentages are as follows: 15% total hours ELL-specific PD for All Teachers and 50% total hours ELL-specific PD for Bilingual Education and ENL teachers. The following PD are proposed: ELLs Instructional and Learning strategies, Envision Math 2.0(Part I & II), Reciprocal Teaching, Reciprocal Reading, Reciprocal Math, Creating Student Centered Lessons, What does differentiation looks like? What are effective Classroom Centers?, How Can We Create Leveled Questions Based on Stages of Language Acquisition , Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs, NYSESLAT speaking components and strategies, NYSESLAT listening components and strategies, NYSESLAT reading components and strategies, NYSESLAT writing components and strategies. Our calendar of Professional Development dates is prepared monthly and additional topics are presented based on mandated requirements, needs of staff and teachers' specific requests. All teachers in the building as well as no-pedagogic staff on a need basis, are part of school-wide, support center as well as our UFT Teacher Center, professional development in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. Professional development topics have been offered and are revisited yearly on the following: Understanding the language proficiency levels of our ELLs, Universal Design for Learning, Understanding the Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, Understanding the components of an Integrated ENL program and What are the New Language Arts Progressions? During grade specific Common Planning periods for all teachers there is collaboration with classroom teachers and other service providers to plan high quality lessons with appropriate differentiation support using Universal Design for Learning(UDL). In addition, discussions on strong high quality instruction in support of Tier1 of RTI is on-going with our RTI provider. 3  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Paste response to question Our school provide professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 80 will be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Our Bilingual and English as a new language teachers, will receive a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the required professional development hours dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The hours of training are achieved during grade-specific Professional Development periods and Monday mandated PD. The Specific workshop activities include those mentioned in question 1 as well as the following: Understanding the Scaffolding Required to Support ELLs Writing, ELLs Identification Process and Stages of Language Acquisition, Text Complexity & English Learners: Building on a Foundation, Common Core Learning Standards and Differentiating Content in an Informational Text. Records of meetings are maintained and include an agenda of topics covered and sign-in sheets for each professional development offered and kept in a professional development binder by PD coach and ENL Coordinator. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Paste response to question here. Our ENL teachers will individually meet with the parents or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences and initial parent orientations. During the scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians, the discussion will be on the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. Appropriate translation is offered in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. The meetings are conducted during our Tuesday parent engagement time as well as through mutual arrangement between teacher and parent. A record of attendance is kept on file by school and individual providers. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Paste response to question here: Historically we have offered, and intend to continue to offer, a Saturday Academy to the parents of ELLs. All parents are invited to our Family Literacy and Math Workshops which are held in the evenings and taught by a school building teacher to support them in helping their children at home. The role of our parent coordinator is focused on: Creating a welcoming school environment for all our parents, meeting with our principal to address parent issues and concerns at the school, sending out letters and surveys in the parents' preferred language to engage parents in their children's education, hence, strengthening parental involvement. In addition, our parent coordinator supports our parents by offering translation and addressing any questions and/or concerns during the educational workshops. Finally, conducting parent workshops during the day in partnership with Community Based Organizations( CBOs)which include: NYPD Identity theft, Finance Company on Managing time and money and Nutrition workshops. 4  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Christopher Eustace, principal , testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Senator Abraham Bernstein Scho School DBN: 11x105 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Christopher Eustace Title Principal Evelyn Alier Assistant Principal Yolanda Ayala Parent Coordinator Ana DeLaCruz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Usama Eldawaity Parent Larry Holz Teacher/Subject Area -Jennifer Volpe Teacher/Subject Area -n/a -n/a -n/a -n/a -n/a -n/a -n/a -n/a Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other Related Service Prov Other n/a Other n/a Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X105 School Name: Senator Abraham Bernstein Superintendent: Jeremy Kabinoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yolanda Ayala Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We created an aggregate from various sources and reports that provide information on the language the parents' preferred for written and oral communication for our entire student population. We look at the RCPL an ATS report that shows the language the parents' preferred for written and oral communication. In addition, we look at Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey that asks the parent's preferred language spoken at home and how they preferred written communication from the school. Furthermore, we look at the Student Emergency Contact Cards that ask parents' preferred language for written and oral communication. The information collected is entered into ATS by the pupil personnel secretary. Finally, surveys are conducted during conferences and workshops to determine further language preferences. Our English as a New Language Department(ENL) Department provides necessary written communication to parents on information generated from the Department, the school Guidance Department, and correspondence from the Testing and Assessment Committee. Correspondence includes, but is not limited to ELL Parent 8  Orientation, all ENL compliance letters, Meet-and-Greet sessions, Parent-Teacher Conferences and Parent Workshops. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI(BANGLA IN BANGLADESH) FRENCH ENGLISH RUSSIAN SPANISH URDU VIETNAMESE WOLOF 13 83 5 1 593 2 244 15 1 1 1.36 8.66 0.52 0.1 61.9 0.21 25.47 1.57 0.1 0.1 13 82 6 1 586 2 250 16 1 1 1.36 8.56 0.63 0.1 61.17 0.21 26.1 1.67 0.1 0.1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Parent-Teacher Conference announcements, One week before the scheduled conference/meet Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school uses the Parent Coordinator, and ENL Department to translate into Spanish as well as other in-house school staff to translate into Arabic and other lower incidence languages. If a language is not 9  represented in our school community, we reach out to the Language Line that provides over the phone interpretation in over 200 languages. Fliers and documents are read to families that are unable to read English, but understand it. In addition, The ENL department uses translated documents as provided in the DOE intranet site. New York State testing calendar, distributed in September After-School and Saturday Academy Program information sheets, distributed approximately one month before program start. All parent information disseminated from the English as a New Language department (Compliance letters, etc.) First week in September after 9/5/18 distributed approximately one month before program starts Distributed on-going based on program mandates time sensitive requirements 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to - Parent-Teacher Conferences: September 17th November 15th. March 14th May 15th September 17, 2018 November 15th, 2018 March 14th, 2019 May 15th, 2019 provide interpretation service(s)? At all our parent conferences, workshops and to all overall parent communication we offer interpretation services in parents' preferred language. Our school has a bilingual personnel that helps support our interpretation needs. Our Parent Coordinator provides Spanish interpretation as well as staff from our ENL department. In house staff provides Arabic , Albanian, Chinese, French and Russian interpretation. Many of our parents that speak other lower-incidence languages visit school with a friend or family member that speaks English. Furthermore, in order to communicate with families, we use over-the-phone interpreter services through the Language Line interpretation services in over 200 0  Parent Workshops in collaboration with Parent Coordinator: Coping with Back to School Stress Helping Your Child with reading at Home ENL Forum/School Parent Communication-Home school Connection Meetings for parents of 5th Graders regarding middle school transition and application process Creating a Conflict Free School Community 10/25/17 Sept.14th, 2018 Sept. 26th, 2018 October 3rd, 2018 October 18th 2018 November 12th, 2018 Healthy eating School Meal Plan December 17th, 2018 Parent and student State Exams Workshop-Starts in February, 2019 February, 2019 Understanding your Child's IEP January, 2019 Using Technology to Enhance Parent Communication, January, 2019 Helping Your Child Avoid Test Anxiety, February, 2019 Reviewing Parent Brochure about the NYSESLAT. March, 2019 languages available 24 hours a day 7 days a week. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our school will contact parents in event of a school emergency using our in-house bilingual staff. If a language is not represented in our school community, we will use the Language Line through a phone script to inform parents that they can call the school in their language. Staff will be train to use the 3-way call system to add Language Line to incoming calls in order to support parents when they are trying to reach the school. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 1  During our weekly Professional Development periods we will have our Language Access Coordinator (LAC) turnkey training on language access to all our staff. We will distribute Language Line information, such as steps to access an over-the-phone interpreter. We will continue to emphasize to all staff members the importance of using translators based on the parents' preferred languages. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our Parent Coordinator has been identified as our Language Access Coordinator who informs and disseminates information regarding the Parents' Bill of Rights, and the Parents' Guide to Language Access. The Welcome Poster and the Language ID Guide have been conspicuously posted. The language Parent's guide is available in the office and placed on counter, visible to any parent as well as distributed during our first parent meeting in September. At parent workshops and conferences parents are informed of their rights to receive interpretation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? At the end of each parent meeting or workshop, feedback occurs through a question and answer period and/or an evaluation form. As a school with the support of the Parent Coordinator, we will continue to engage parents in order to create a focus group inclusive of all culture and languages represented in our school to keep an open line of communication and gather additional feedback. An additional resource is the feedback gathered from our Saturday Academy parent component. as well as during our on-going monthly parent coordinator and school staff workshops. 2 
