2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X112 School Name: P.S. 112 BRONXWOOD Principal: ANDREA TUCCI 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Bronxwood School 11X112 321100010112 Pre-K to 5 School Number (DBN): 1925 Schieffelin Avenue Bronx, New York 10466 (718) 654-6377 (718) 654-7931 Phone Number: Andrea Tucci Fax: atucci@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: YMCA Andrea Tucci FaatimahCroston Tesha Edwards AnatasiaGuadalupe AineSia Michelle Cedeno N/A District Information Geographical District: 11 MeishaPorter Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Avenue Bronx, New York 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: mross@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-678-6460 Phone Number: (718) 519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Ave, Bronx, NY 10462 Nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT ● ● ● Name Position and Constituent Group Andrea Tucci TeshaEdwards Victoria Figueroa N/A Michelle Cedeno N/A N/A Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) CrystalMendez IdaliaMateo Latoya Walker Stephanie Coletti Jennifer Beberman QuamJones Rocio Pena Chantel Martin LuzDiaz JulissaJimenez ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● Staff Staff Staff Staff Staff Staff Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. C.S. 112 is located in the Williamsbridge area of the Bronx within District 11, servicing approximately 422 students in grades PK-5 for the 2018- 2109 school year. The school is part of the Renewal School program and is a year 5 Renewal School, which has helped to transition our school into a Community School. Our student body is comprised of 48% Black, 49% Hispanic, 0.2% Asian/American, 0.2% Indian/Pacific Islander and 2.6% White. Boys account for 51% of the student body and girls account for 49%. As part of our demographics our student body also includes 5% English as a New Language learners (ENLs) and 20% of our population is comprised of Students with Disabilities (SWDs). C.S. 112 has a partnership with an in-house Community Based Organization YMCA and a mental health provider, Astor Services for Children and Families to help the school provide wrap-around services. The mission of C.S. 112, The Bronxwood School is based on a deep commitment to provide rigorous learning opportunities so that all students can achieve at the highest level possible in preparation for middle school readiness and beyond. Through a community wide social-emotional approach we offer a comprehensive instructional program that equips students with the knowledge and skills to prepare our students for middle school transitioning and preparation for high school, college, and career readiness through our instructional alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). At C.S. 112, we believe students learn best through a 'whole child' approach to student learning. We also believe instudent-centered learning focused on literacy development and in engaging our students by helping them to better develop their foundational reading, writing, and problem-solving skills across subject areas through rigorous and engaging tasks, questioning, and discussion opportunities At C.S. 112, teachers, parents and students work together with respect and consideration for all to achieve excellence in meeting the Common Core Learning Standards in Reading, Writing, and Math using problem solving skills across content areas. Our approach addresses the needs of the multiple learning styles of our students. Only through this approach, will we capture, nurture, and expand the knowledge of our students here at C.S. 112. C.S.112 is located in a three-story building built in 1953. The building is clean and well maintained. We average three classes per grade (Pre-K - 5), self-contained special education class on in grades 1- 5, and 5 Integrated Co-Teaching Services classes. Activities, such as informative workshops and events are planned on a monthly basis. A full-time Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, and Community Based Organization (CB0) Director work collectively to promote parent involvement and engagement at the school. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  We also have a population of students that are 'at-risk', due to their attendance rate. They have patterns of lateness or absences that impede their academic performance due to loss of instructional time. Our collaborative approach with our Community based Organization (CB0), strategically allows for a successful partnership in supporting the 'whole child' learning model and approach by providing socio-emotional, mental-health, and additional instructional supports and interventions for our 'at-risk' population. To this end, we have assigned Success Mentors within our school's Attendance Team. Success Mentors are staff members who are assigned to a group of students who are chronically absent throughout the school year to check-in with them and monitor the student's attendance. The student body is served by 35 professionals and support staff, including a Principal, 2Assistant Principals, 2 full time guidance counselors, a SETSS teacher, cluster teachers, a secretary, and one site safety officer. The Principal, Assistant Principals, and Lead Teachers with support from outside instructional coaches provide professional development through workshops, study groups, and the modeling of strategies during “push-in” lessons and coaching sessions. The school also receives additional instructional coaching and operational supports from the Bronx Field Support Center (BFSC) and other outside coaches who provide in-house supports to teachers. According to our most recent Quality Review 2017-2018 C.S. 112x has established a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provides supports to achieve expectations. The school received a "Proficient" rating on 7 out of 10 Quality Review indicators during our 2017-2018 Quality Review in the following areas: Positive Learning Environment; High Expectations; Leveraging Resources, Goals and Action Plans; Teacher Support and Supervision; Teacher Teams and Leadership Development; and Monitoring and Revising Systems. Our school's area of celebration on our 2017-2018 Quality Review was in leveraging resources. Our area of focus for the upcoming school year will be on instructional and pedagogical coherence and refining and modeling our school-wide instructional expectations. Instructional coaches will continue to visit classrooms to coach teachers and to give specific feedback on instructional practice and planning. C.S.112 will also continue to work closely with our CBO on developing high expectations for both parents and students by celebrating parent contributions to student success and attendance. At CS 112 we whole-heartedly believe that having strong ties to the families in our community is a non-negotiable component of effective school leadership and we will continue our focus on building a robust and supportive learning environment and community at C.S. 112 for all students. The 2017-2018 School Survey shows that the school is above average in effective school leadership and average in rigorous instruction, supportive environment, collaborative teachers and trust. The school scored lower on strong family and community ties, which is an area of focus for our continued collaboration with parents and our CBO partnership. Technology has expanded in our school. C.S. 112 was the recipients of a RESO-A grant from Borough President Ruben Diaz Jr. In addition to the technology already in place at the school, the school will be receiving new computers for our Computer Lab, Elmo projectors, laptop carts, and a laptop for each teacher. As per our 2017 - 2018 Quality Review, improving student achievement across all disciplines and grade levels is paramount to moving our school forward. In response, we have implemented several initiatives listed below: C.S. 112 will take an active and continuous data-driven approach to improving student performance, using TCRWP, baseline assessments from TCRWP, Ready data, iReady data, item analysis, portfolio assessments, and other indicators to identify and address student weaknesses and target areas for growth with a concentrated focus on identified high-leverage Common Core standards. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  At our school students will be able to participate in various after school programs and activities provided by our Community Based Organization (CB0). Our Student Council will be surveying students to see what after school programs they would prefer to join in order to increase student voice at the school. We currently have many partnerships with the following organizations: Astor Services for Children & Families, Food Pantry, Notes in Motion, District 11 Superintendent's Team, Bronx Field Support Center, and Education Through Music. We continually revisit our Instructional Focus, so that it is aligned to our ‘Theory of Action’. Instructional Focus: "If we develop a supportive and student centered learning community, focused on explicit teaching through rigorous tasks that incorporate scaffolds for diverse learners and checks for understanding then we will be able to increase student achievement and middle school readiness at CS 112." In order to meet our goals as outlined by our Mission and Instructional Focus we are continuing to implement the following school improvement strategies based on analysis of our 2017-2018 school quantitative and qualitative data findings:  We will implement cycles of Professional Development to help us achieve our instructional focus. The cycles will consist of analyzing data in literacy and Math. We will triangulate data from various sources: iReady (ELA. And Math), Ready (3-5), TCRWP, TC Reading/Writing, and Go Math with the support of in-house and outside coaches.  Two days a week, classrooms will implement iReady ELA and two days of iReady math.  Expanded Learning Time opportunities for all students, including additional instruction in iReady.  Continued transformation into a community school model in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectivelyresponding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of our students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement with support from our CBO. C.S. 112 underwent a two-day Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) and support visit from the New York State Department in October of this school year. The following were the recommendations given to the school that were worked on by school leaders and staff: -The principal and her instructional team will articulate the school’s instructional focus to all staff, families, and students. The team should have the state focus in multiple formats, which should be disseminated to all school community members. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  - The principal and her Instructional Leadership Team should establish a refined instructional focus that all school community members can understand what “explicit teaching” and “rigorous tasks” mean in this school. - The principal and her Instructional Leadership Team, will assess the needs of teachers relative to scaffolding practices and establish school-wide goals and intermittent benchmarks for effective implementation by the end of the school year. - Create a time line to develop a system of communicating goals and benchmarks to track how the extracurricular programs are meeting the school's vision and expectations. Additionally, the leaders of the Community Based Organization should be made aware that they are accountable for data collection and analysis and that information should be communicated regularly to school leadership. - Work with parent coordinator and other involved leadership to design a method for collecting data (attendance, parent survey, interest data, and needs assessments) and feedback from families and parent support organizations. Create a time line for data collection, analysis to inform next steps. -To support and provide students with disabilities, special education teachers should meet regularly to discuss and review curriculum for adaptations, modifications, and accommodations. To foster a consistent reference to the students’ individual goals. This practice will provide and ongoing system which can create opportunities to work on developing IEP goals that are obtainable, realistic, and transferable. Moreover, when these systems include students, such students will begin to practice and take ownership of self- monitoring for individual needs. -Classroom teachers should be provided with salient data regarding ELLs and include discussions and analysis of NYSESLAT data. Provisions should be made for training related to language proficiency levels and instructional strategies that address student needs. For example, what are the"can do’s". Training should be provided in the inclusion of language objectives in lesson planning. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  The Bronxwood School community is working collaboratively on meeting our state recommendations for improvement and to meeting our year 5 Renewal School goals and benchmarks. We also look forward to embracing our challenges and celebrating our successes throughout the 2018-2019 school year as a learning community. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X112 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 432 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 42 22 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 18 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 92.6% % Reduced Lunch 4.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 48.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.09 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 15.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 98% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 39 39 90.0% 3.9% 22.5% 48.6% 0.5% 0.0% 2 10% 6.5 8.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17  2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection: Based on our 2017-2018 Quality Review our school received a "Developing" in in all three Instructional Core indicators 1.1 Curriculum , 1.2 Pedagogy , and 2.2 Assessment. C.S. 112's major areas of focus in moving forward into the 2018-2019 will be on the the 'Instructional Core' indicators of the Quality Review, aligned to the 'Rigorous Instruction' element of the Framework for Great Schools. School Strengths:  Our school's area of celebration in our 2017-2018 Quality Review was in leveraging resources (QR Indicator 1.3). According to our QR feedback teachers receive a wide range of feedback from all school leaders in the building that supports their practices.  A review of observation reports demonstrated that school leaders' recommendations are regularly implemented in the next observation, thus making the feedback both actionable and effective.  A review of the observation schedule shows that there are also continual, focused, formative loops of  observations. Lead teachers (Model and Peer Collaborative teachers) were hired to visit classrooms and coach teachers on the inquiry process of using data to drive instruction. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19   We are also developing our staff's capacity to understand how to analyze and interpret data through the use of the Data Wise analysis process. this protocol will help us to adapt and integrate a specific protocols for looking at student work/data and teacher practice, in order to move student achievement at C.S. 112. School Needs:  An area of focus identified within our 2017-2018 Quality Review is QR indicator 1.1. 'Curriculum', 1.2 'Pedagogy', and 2.2. Assessment  Teachers need to work on digging deeper when analyzing data to inform and adjust curricula  Modeling, scaffolding, and quality student discussions where students are making their work and learning visible is not yet seen across all classrooms.  According to the 2018-2019 Quality Review, the NYCDOE instructional shifts in ELA and math were not present across all classrooms and planning rigorous tasks with pre-planned higher level thinking questions needs improvement Based on our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide data 15.9% of our students met State standards on the State English test: In addition 8.0% met state standards on the state math test. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? C.S. 112's 2017-2018 Instructional Focus is as follows: "If we develop a supportive and student centered learning community, focused on explicit teaching using rigorous tasks that include scaffolds for diverse learning and checks for understanding, then we will be able to increase student achievement and middle school readiness at CS 112." C.S. 112 will provide opportunities for staff (weekly), parents, students, and vested stakeholders in our community throughout the school year along with providing a Professional Development Plan to ensure that all are involved in the training process. Professional developments will also be expanded to accomplish the following:  Target our teachers needs as they apply to the Danielson framework and their Advance ratings which are based on it.  Develop a Professional Development team that will create a plan from inclusive of feedback from the staff so that the staff can have input into shaping the Instructional Focus and having it become a reality. The administrative staff and the school community met to review and revise the instructional focus to align it with our goals and initiatives for the 2018-19 school year. Include the PD plan as a part of the PD calendar.   Regular Professional Development trainings which focus on the Data Wise data analysis tool. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  The Bronxwood School’s 2018-2019 curricula will incorporate strategically chosen CCLS focus standards and units from, Teachers College Reading and Writing Units, Go Math, Engage, and interdisciplinary units created by teacher teams aligned to the school’s selected CCLS focus standards and the instructional shifts. Purposeful independent reading will continue to be embedded to promote time for additional independent reading and writing across core subjects. The Social Studies and Science curriculum will be aligned to the NYC Social Studies Scope and Sequence and Science Scope and Sequence, and will incorporate focus literacy standards selected by the school leaders and teachers. All other subjects will be aligned to the CCLS literacy focus standards and the content standards for their subject. Common CCLS aligned rubrics from TC will be used to track progress on selected writing standards across grades and subjects. An additional hour of Expanded Learning Time will continue to be embedded in the school’s program Monday-Friday to allow for RTI, AIS, and/or additional learning opportunities for students. The School Leadership Team (SLT) will continue to collaborate with our selected Community Based Organization (CBO) to integrate learning experiences that include blended learning opportunities in order to enhance student engagement and learning. The CBO will also help to support and provide learning opportunities, workshops, and services for our parents based on their interests and needs. Pedagogical practices will incorporate an emphasis on lesson planning, teacher collaboration, student-centered learning, independent reading, discussion opportunities for students, writing within all subject areas aligned to Teachers College writing units, and use of common CCLS aligned rubrics. Teachers will target the three major learning modalities (visual, auditory, kinesthetic) of students within their lesson planning to provide a common school-wide Universal Design for Learning (UDL) instructional strategy that provides multiple entry points, ensuring that each child can access the curriculum. It will assist teachers in being better able to know the "what, how, and why" in their lesson planning. This will enable teachers to more effectively plan lessons that address the visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactile parts of their lessons, all of which are vital to addressing individual points of entry. The Accountable Talk strategies, Talk Moves, effective questioning, and checks for understanding will continue to be used as common school-wide instructional practices to promote student-to-student interactions and a shift towards student-centered learning through the I.M.P.R.E.S.S (Instructional Planning, Multiple Entry Points, Progress Monitoring, Rigorous Tasks, Explicit Instruction, Scaffolds, Small Group instruction 'look fors'). The school leaders and lead teachers/coaches will monitor consistency of school-wide instructional strategies through formal and informal observations, classroom walk-throughs , and professional development that is designed to reinforce the key areas around which our instructional focus is based. In this manner, teachers can be observed utilizing school wide instructional strategies and be provided actionable feedback and resources to support the continued practice of these chosen measures. The school will have common assessments, TCWRP, iReady, and Ready to determine and track progress on student reading levels and standards mastery. Running Records will serve as benchmark assessments to monitor and track predicted student performance on state tests, and will serve as data for teachers to determine modifications needed within their lessons and/or units. Teachers College (TC) rubrics will continue to be used in ELA, Science, and Social Studies to assess student-writing products. Integration of Math Solutions coaching and iReady will help to provide instructional supports for math instruction at C.S. 112. School leaders and teacher teams will continue collaborate to review data findings and will make adjustments to instructional practice and modifications to units and/or lesson plans, as needed. Teachers will collaborate with school leaders, Field Support and external coaches to also implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Our vision for implementation of CCLS aligned curricula that meets the needs of diverse learners, personally, academically and culturally revolves around pedagogical practices that incorporate an emphasis on lesson planning, 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  teacher collaboration, student-centered learning, independent reading, discussion opportunities for students, writing within all subject areas aligned to Teachers College writing and reading units (TC Reading will be be new to the school), and use of common CCLS aligned curricula and rubrics. Diverse learners identified are ELLs and SWDs, who are being supported through small group instruction and one to one supports through 'push-in' instructions. Teachers will target the three major learning modalities of students within their lesson planning to provide a common school-wide Universal Design for Learning (UDL) instructional strategy that provides multiple entry points, ensuring that each child can access the lesson. This is done to make our diverse learners' early experiences with a topic of study more engaging and motivating. We take into account what a child already knows and/or the level of understanding he or she already possesses. This can be based on prior learning, cultural experience, or a combination of both. Once we know that child's "point of entry" capacity, the student is offered a variety of ways to enter into the study of that topic. The Accountable Talk strategies, Talk Moves, effective questioning, and checks for understanding aligned to I.M.P.R.E.S.S 'look fors' will continue to be used as common school-wide instructional practices to promote student-to-student interactions and a continued shift towards improved student-centered learning. District 11 is also promoting that each school incorporate an Equity & Excellence focus to target boys of colors in our district. C.S. 112 will be creating an Equity Team in the 2018-2019 school year to help focus on and target the academic and socio-emotional needs of our boys of colors. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? Our vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be middle school ready and on a path to high school, career, and college readiness are directly aligned to our use of Common Core aligned curricula, which incorporate rigorous standards and integrate the NYCDOE instructional shifts in literacy and mathematics. The instructional shifts will address the pre-requisite needed for students to be able to problem-solve, cite evidence from a text to substantiate a response, engage in rich and rigorous conversations about complex / real world texts, utilize various sources and references to provide facts to support an argument, and develop grade level vocabulary that can be used across curricula to explain and argue complex texts. This in turn assists in preparing students with the foundational skills needed to be successful in middle school and in preparation for high school and college readiness. District 11 is also promoting that each school incorporate an Equity & Excellence focus to target boys of colors in our district. C.S. 112 will be creating an Equity Team in the 2018-2019 school year to help focus on and target the academic and socio-emotional needs of our boys of colors. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Our vision for delivery of instruction aligned to setting up students for success is through the development and integration of pedagogical practices that allow for students to become more self-sufficient in their own learning. To achieve this, we are promoting a push for workshop-model instruction and learning opportunities that provide our young scholars with multiple-entry points to access the lessons, targeting our diverse student body and their personal, socio-emotional, and academic needs. In this manner, our students early experiences with an area of study provide information about how a student may best learn a new concept or have demonstrated an idea. Teachers use this information to inform differentiated instruction and strategic approaches to have them play a significant role in guiding their learning. This allows our teachers to push students instructionally and provide a variety of opportunities for them to provide us with evidence of learning through student portfolio work and various checks for understanding and student discussion opportunities within each lesson. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  Accountable Talk strategies, Talk Moves, effective questioning, and checks for understanding aligned to I.M.P.R.E.S.S 'look fors' will continue to be developed and integrated as common school-wide instructional practices to promote student-to-student interactions and a continued shift towards improved student-centered learning. C.S. 112 is also expanding it's Equity & Excellence focus and goal aligned to the NYC and District 11 equity focus for boys of color, based on school disproportionality data. In addition to continuing our small group mentoring program for boys of color, we are also creating a school Equity Team for the 2018-2019 school year to expand our school's Equity Focus initiatives. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Our vision for delivery of instruction aligned to setting up students for success is through creating pedagogical practices that allow for students to become more self-sufficient in their own learning. Our lesson planning expectations include learning opportunities that provide students with multiple-entry points and differentiation. We expect teachers to include multiple-entry points for students to access lessons, targeting our diverse student body and their personal, socio-emotional, and academic needs. In this manner, our students early experiences with an area of study provide information about how a student may learn a new concept or have demonstrated an idea. Teachers use this information to inform differentiated instruction and use strategic approaches to have students play a role in guiding their own learning. Through the use of student self assessments, Universal Design for Learning (UDL) planning lessons, and clear goal setting for our classes, our teachers are able to focus on multiple entry points for our students to help them achieve academic success. Once a week at teacher team meetings, teachers will work on data inquiry to look at student work. Teachers will assess student work to determine student centered problems and problems of practice. The data collected will be shared with the grade team and the supervising assistant principal. Student growth will be monitored through the use of consistent and flexible grouping of students based on need, as determined by information gathered in inquiry team meetings. Teachers will provide when necessary at least two multiple entry points along with a minimum of two checks for understanding in their lessons, so that student learning is optimal. In the classroom, this will be evidenced and supported by student led discussions, teachers conferencing with students on their progress, goal setting by both individual students and the whole class, and UDL as an instructional model to plan lessons. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Our vision for a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes will be directly aligned to the use of a variety of assessments to track student learning including: baseline and benchmark assessments from the Teachers College/Engageny-Eureka curricula, student portfolio work products, MOSL assessments, 'checks for understanding' during lessons, iReady, and Lexile/F&P reading level tracking through TCRWP Running Records. Assessments used including the reasons for their use, schedule, and how the data will be used to improve instructional practice and student outcomes will be outlined within our school's 2018-2019 Assessment Plan. At the heart of C.S. 112's use of data is the implementation of the Data Wise data analysis process and protocols. Our teachers have received training and are certified in the use of Data Wise, which not only helps us identify which data is beneficial to driving instruction, but it shows how to use this data to improve teaching and learning. Effective data analysis will help us make more informed decisions regarding our instructional practice. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose iReady (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) diagnostic, formative, benchmark, 2-5 Tracking of student progress towards meeting school's Renewal School student 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23  Running Records formative, diagnostic, benchmark K-5 Student portfolio work products formative, benchmark Pre K-5 State Exams summative 3-5 achievement benchmarks for math and ELA Tracking of student reading levels and reading level growth throughout the school year Will be used to analyze the progress of student learning on rigorous learning tasks using rubrics and Tracking of student progress towards meeting state and Renewal School student achievement benchmarks for math and ELA Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, as a result of teaching practices aligned to explicit instructional expectations there will be a 5% decrease of students scoring at proficiency levels 1, as measured by the the New York State ELA and Math exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Renewal Student Achievement Benchmark: Average Math & ELA Proficiency and Performance benchmarks Renewal Benchmark Leading Indicator: Rigorous Instruction target (NYC School Survey) Instructional Core Quality Review indicators 1.1, 1.2 and 2.2 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. School leaders in collaboration with the school’s Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) and external coaches will develop the school’s 2018-2019 Professional Development Plan, which will include strategic cycles of professional development opportunities, based on teacher needs aligned to the Danielson Framework. Teachers will analyze student beginning of year Ready, iReady and TCRWP data to create strategic small groups for targeted instruction within their classroom and for ELT instruction (quarterly strategic student grouping will be conducted when data becomes available). How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Teachers 2018-2019 Renewal ELA & Math proficiency and performance benchmarks Quality Review Instructional Core Indicators 1.1, 1.2 and 2.2 August 2018-October 2018 Principal and DSR Principal, APs, DSR Teachers and all students 2018-2019 Renewal ELA & Math proficiency and performance benchmarks Quality Review Instructional Core Indicators 1.1, 1.2 and 2.2 Quarterly throughout the 2018-2019 school year as student data becomes available from iReady, Ready, and TCRWP assessments Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25 APs and teachers 2018-2019 Renewal ELA & Math proficiency and performance benchmarks Quality Review Instructional Core Indicators 1.1, 1.2 and 2.2 Principal and DSR September 2018-June 2019 Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR External coaches will work with Assistant Principals and teachers to model best teaching and instructional planning practices that support small groups for targeted instruction and/or intervention, as needed (strategic small grouping will occur quarterly based on Ready, iReady, and TCRWP data findings). Coaches will also support teachers in improving their instructional practices using resources from Math Exemplars, Math Solutions, Algebra for All, Engage, and Teacher’s College. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers, CBO (YMCA), and Parent Coordinator will be collaborating on communication plans and school events each month for the 2018-2019 school for parents/families to help support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to provide parents with information and resources that will help to support their children at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. iReady (site license common assessment and intervention) Ready Paper Pencil (common assessment for select ELL= population as needed) Imagine Learning (site license common assessment for select ELL- population as needed) Teachers College Reading/Writing Project (those accepted in the partnership) Math Solutions Additional On-Site Coaching (Math) Metamorphosis Teaching and Learning Communities on site coaching cycles (Math) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Literacy and Math Coaching (consultant, teacher coach, etc) from FSC Per session and per diem funds (PD sub coverages and after hours training; Saturday Academies) iReady Laptops and Chromebooks for iReady and MyOn TC Units of Study (Writing and Reading) TC Libraries (Trade books) to Accompany Units of Study Leveled Libraries to Support Reading Workshop Independent Reading Book Set (Take Home Libraries for MS- Scholastic, etc) Per session programs for AIS and/or Test Prep Saturday Academy, Thursday Academy, etc… Teacher Leaders (Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers) RTI program through outside organization Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title I 1003(a) X Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, 70% of students will increase their reading level by a minimum of one level, as measured by a mid-year TCRWP running records assessment. By February 2019, 70% of students will increase their score by 20 points on mid year iReady Assessments and demonstrate achievement progress on rigorous short and long response mid-year writing assessments in ELA and Math, as measured by CCLS aligned rubrics. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  iReady, Ready, TCRWP, Advance Teacher observations using Danielson Framework, and school created sample state exam questions assessments. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection: Our NYC School Survey Report findings, aligned to the 'Supportive Environment' element of the Framework for Great Schools, shows that our school is approaching a target of effective engagement. This is evidenced by our concerted efforts in making our building warm, inviting, and children friendly. This includes our classrooms which are designed to be colorful, engaging, and conducive to thinking and learning. Our teachers receive professional development on classroom management and the accurate analysis and use of data to drive instruction and meet our students where they are on the academic spectrum. Supervisors empathetically listen to staff and provide support and encouragement whenever possible. School strengths:  Based on our 2017-2108 Quality Review C.S. 112 has established a culture of learning that communicates expectations to staff, students, and families, while providing supports to achieve those expectations.  Partnership with Field Support Center has brought Restorative Circles training and best practices to target socio-emotional needs of students  ASTOR Services that target socio-emotional and mental health needs of targeted students  Based on our NYC School 2018 Survey Findings, C.S. 112 establishes a culture where students feel safe, challenged to grow, and supported to meet instructional expectations. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  School Needs:  An area of focus according to our 2017-2018 Quality Review is improving in the area of Rigorous classroom instruction. We are in the process of defining and modeling our definition of rigor in the classroom to accommodate the needs of children who fall across the spectrum of ability. It is the constant question: What does rigor look like across the grade levels ( Sped and ICT included)? Our definition is the same now for all students. Rigor is defined as "Stretch and Productive Struggle". Our Multiple Point of Entry model allows us to take the same standard and objective and apply it to any lesson regardless of the current level of student capacity or understanding. We meet the student where he or she is on the academic spectrum. We differentiate. We scaffold the material. We use Multiple Points of Entry. We stretch their current level of understanding, then we allow them to struggle with the content. The result is more thoughtful, more engaged, students.  An area of focus according to our NYC School Survey data findings include maintaining the growing trust between administrators, educators, students, and their families we have established at CS 112. Communication between vested stakeholders is open, fair and honest. We listen to one another, support and encourage one another, and make the concerns of the community 'ours'.  An area of focus according to our School Quality Guide is improving in Student Achievement on State ELA and Math exams. Currently our school is rated in the lowest third citywide. We have introduced to our instructional program Teachers College, Engage and Math Solutions. Math Solutions is a comprehensive Math skills development program designed to make math come alive in our school. It will also provide teachers with the training and strategies needed to have our students excel in Math and move beyond target areas. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? C.S. 112 believes that the continued thrust of our Bear Pride Expectations (Be cooperative, Exceptionally respectful, Always prepared, Responsible, Safe) throughout the school community, as well as the ‘re-branding’ of our school through multiple PBIS initiatives, will support our school in continuing to move in a positive direction towards creating a safe and inclusive learning environment for all stakeholders. In order to provide our students and families with socio-emotional, mental, and health services, the school will continue partner with our new CBO- YMCA. Through the school’s collaboration with YMCA our students and parents will continue receive additional academic, socio-emotional, and mental health and support services in the upcoming school year. School leaders are working to continue to develop our Student Council in the 2018-2019 school year to promote students having a voice in PBIS initiatives at the school. Our school in collaboration with our CBO will partner to gather, track, analyze, and monitor various data collected to respond to the social and emotional needs of our students. School leaders in collaboration with the CBO will make attendance and chronic absenteeism a focus goal for the 2018-2019 school year, so that students do not continue to lose instructional time. Chronically absent students will be identified early in September and October and the CBO will receive a list of these students to provide additional one-to-2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  one support to each student through Success Mentors. The school expects to meet the attendance benchmark and metric targets for the 2018-2019 school year. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus YMCA AIS instruction, after-school, ELT, family engagement, attendance Astor Mental Health Social-emotional and mental health services with 2 counselors to assist our students' total well being. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? We will use our partnership with the CBO to create a supportive environment and engagement for our students’ families, through our PBIS initiatives. Families will participate in monthly activities based on a school created feedback surveys collected from parents . PBIS is outlined within our school's RSCEP goal and action plan for the 'Supportive Environment' element of the Framework for Great Schools and 6 Keys. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. During the 2018-2019 school year, the school’s Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) team in collaboration with the school’s Community Based Organization (CBO) and Attendance Team, will continue to expand our PBIS initiatives, incentives, and targeted attendance interventions resulting in movement from a 90.4% attendance rate to a 92% attendance rate by June 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Renewal Benchmark Leading Indicator- Student attendance benchmark for 2018-2019 Renewal Benchmark Leading Indicator: Supportive Environment benchmark (NYC School Survey) 2018-2019 Quality Review- Indicator 1.4 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) School Leaders- Principal and APs, CBO Director Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Positive Learning Environment Quality Review indicator and NYC Survey indicator September 2018-June 2019 Renewal Math and ELA performance and proficiency benchmarks (targeted loss of instructional time) Chronically absent and students with poor attendance Boys of Color School leaders will ensure that the CBO Director and Attendance Team identify groups of students for targeted attendance interventions; including assigning a specific Success Mentor to help monitor each targeted chronically absent student. School leaders will also develop an Equity Focus Team to address the academic and socio-emotional needs of our boys of color. NYC School Survey- Parent feedback September 2018-June 2019 Teachers, Principal, APs Teachers will use Class Dojo to communicate any attendance concerns to parents with children they see are falling behind on their attendance and will use Restorative Circles practices in their classes, as needed. (Throughout 2018-2019 school year) Parents Targeted Students How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR ATS Attendance Reports Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32 New school staff and new CBO staff Positive Learning Environment Quality Review indicator and NYC Survey indicator September 2018- June 2019 FSC support staff and CBO Director Principal, APs Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR All students Positive Learning Environment Quality Review indicator and NYC Survey indicator September 2018- June 2019 CBO Director and Attendance Team Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR FSC will provide Restorative Circles training to additional C.S. 112 staff, including the CBO support staff, in order to continue expanding Restorative Circles practices at the school to create a student-centered culture that supports the socio-emotional needs of students (by end of October 2018). The CBO Director in collaboration with the school’s Attendance Team will create a September-January action plan for attendance incentives at the start of the school year and a second plan for incentive trips for the February-June period; both plans will be shared and approved by the principal, DSR, and CBO Director at the start of the school year and during the mid-year RSCEP check-in. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. CBO Director and Parent Coordinator will be developing a September 2018- June 2019 plan for monthly family/parent events that will include and target academic and socio-emotional needs of students through the sharing of school information, school family/student services and resources for parents. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. PBIS team, PBIS rewards and events for students, progress monitoring by school leaders, CBO support staff, RTI team, Attendance Team, New Visions tool, and Class Dojo, morning step and basketball program Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title I TA Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the school will have a minimum of 92.% student attendance average as reported in ATS and the New Visions attendance tool. By February 2019, we will revisit the action plan for incentive trips and events for the February-June period will be created by the CBO Director and Attendance Team and will be shared with the principal and DSR for final approval. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student attendance data from ATS and New Visions Student Sorter/Attendance Heat tracker. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: X SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection: Our NYC School Survey Report findings, aligned to the 'Collaborative Teachers' element of the Framework for Great Schools, shows that our school..... School Strengths:  Based on our 2017-2018 Quality Review findings C.S. 112 has integrated systems and structures for looking and analyzing student work and data within teacher teams through their participation and integration of Data Wise.  The school is going into the third year of being a Data Wise Model school.  A school based team comprised of school administrators and leads teacher has been certified and trained in Data Wise protocols to move this work forward this year and into the upcoming school year. School Needs:  An area of focus identified within our 2017-2018 Quality Review is that while teachers meet to look at school data, it has not led to improved teacher practice. School leaders have identified a need for teachers to differentiate for diverse learning and to increase student engagement and rigor of tasks.  Another area of focus according to our 2017-2018 Quality Review feedback is that looking at data has not served as a catalyst for instructional or curricular changes and has not led to teachers strengthening their instructional capacity across all classrooms yet. 2017-2018 NY State IIT Recommendations: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  To support and provide students with disabilities, special education teachers should meet regularly to discuss and review curriculum for adaptations, modifications, and accommodations. To foster a consistent reference to the students’ individual goals. This practice will provide and ongoing system which can create opportunities to work on developing IEP goals that are obtainable, realistic, and transferable. Moreover, when these systems include students, such students will begin to practice and take ownership of self-monitoring for individual needs. Timeline – Ongoing Classroom teachers should be provided with salient data regarding ELLs and include discussions and analysis of NYSESLAT data. Provisions should be made for training related to language proficiency levels and instructional strategies that address student needs. For examples, what are the can do’s? Training should be provided in the inclusion of language objectives in lesson planning. Timeline – Ongoing. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? All teachers at C.S.112 will engage in content area professional collaborations that promote the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards, the instructional shifts, and use data in alignment to teacher practice in helping achieve the school’s instructional focus and RSCEP goals. In accordance with our efforts to improve our use of data in driving instruction, staff has received training in Data Wise. Our teachers have received training in the use of Data Wise, which not only helps us identify which data is beneficial to driving instruction, but it shows how to use this data to improve teaching and learning. Effective data analysis will help us to be able to look at data from teaching and learning so that we can make informed decisions regarding our instructional practice. Distributive leadership opportunities will continue to emerge, where lead teachers will co-facilitate team meetings and will engage in key decisions regarding student learning. School leaders in collaboration with the lead teachers will also develop a differentiated 2018-2019 Professional Development Plan that will include differentiated cycles of supports and professional development opportunities for all teachers. 2017-2018 Quality Review findings found that teachers still need to align instructional tasks to the instructional shifts and the use of scaffolds and deeper student discussions and critical thinking and writing opportunities to make the student learning visible across all classrooms is an area of focus. Student portfolios also need to have a more defined structure school-wide highlighting the higher level work students completed throughout the year with all the expectations clarified by the school leaders with portfolio checks throughout the school year. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? School leaders in collaboration with the instructional cabinet will develop a differentiated 2018-2019 Professional Development Plan that includes differentiated cycles of supports in collaboration with the Field Support Center (FSC), and professional development opportunities, that help to improve teacher practice and student learning. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36  The LASW inquiry cycles will be used to help inform adjustments needed to the curriculum and teaching practice, as measured by at least a 70% increase of teachers attaining an 'Effective' or higher on Danielson Framework focus components 1e, 3b, 3c, and/or 3d How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? We envision that all our teachers will collaborate within teacher to look at student work using a protocol to support improved teaching practices and student learning aligned to Danielson Framework focus components 1e, 3b, 3c, and/or 3d. The LASW inquiry cycles will be used to help inform adjustments needed to the curriculum and teaching practice, as measured by at least a 70% increase of teachers attaining an 'Effective' or higher on Danielson Framework focus components 1e, 3b, 3c, and/or 3d How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? We envision that all our teachers will collaborate within and across teacher teams to analyze student work for the purpose of making strategic adjustments to curriculum and plan engaging targeted lessons. , to present and highlight their impact on teaching practices and student learning aligned to Danielson Framework focus components 1e, 3b, 3c, and/or 3d and to inform any adjustments needed to the curricula. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent Student portfolio work products Will be used to assess student achievement and progress on rigorous DOK level 3/4 tasks during the September 2018 - June 2019 school year. Teacher Teams- Inquiry Binders Will be used to memorialize the work of teacher teams and their findings on their team's impact on teaching practice and/or student learning based on their inquiry work during the September 2018- June 2019 school year. Advance Observation findings/data/reports Will be used to assess teacher progress on focus Danielson components 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d during the September 2018 - June 2019 school year. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, all teachers will collaborate within teacher teams using and inquiry process to leverage the ongoing use of a collaborative looking at student work protocol (LASW) to uncover what students know and still need to learn to inform instructional next steps resulting in a 20 point increase student performance levels on iReady diagnostic assessments in ELA and mathematics. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37 List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Renewal Benchmark Lead Indicator- Rigorous Instruction Improvement in the 'Collaborative Teachers' data section of the School Quality Guide Renewal Math & ELA performance and proficiency benchmarks 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher Teams The principal will ensure that Assistant Principals are supporting teacher teams with remaining on task during team meetings while using the Looking at Student Work protocol in order for teacher teams to leverage the data to plan for instruction. All Teachers and targeted students Teachers will review qualitative and quantitative data revealed from the LASW process then they will collaborate to plan targeted lessons for individual and small groups of students. DSR will check-in with the principal team leaders to monitor progress and effectiveness of each inquiry cycle ensuring school leaders and teacher teams remain on target. Assistant Principal Team Leaders and teacher teams Principal, APs, DSR Renewal Math & ELA proficiency and performance benchmarks Quality Review- Collaborative Teachers indicator Cycle #1 to be completed by end of January 2019 and Cycle #2 by June 2019 Renewal Math & ELA proficiency and performance benchmarks September 2018-June 2019 Principal, APs, DSR Quality Review- Collaborative Teachers indicator Renewal Math & ELA proficiency and performance benchmarks Quality Review- Collaborative Teachers indicator October 2018-May 2019 Principal, APs, and DSR How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  CBO Director and support staff will be trained in iReady to help provide data reports and analysis supports to school leaders and teachers, as needed. CBO Director and staff Renewal Math & ELA proficiency and performance benchmarks September 2018-November 2018 Principal and CBO Director Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-in with principal and DSR 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. CBO Director and Parent Coordinator will be developing a September 2018- June 2019 year long plan for monthly family/parent events that will include and target academic and socio-emotional needs of students through the sharing of school information, school family/student services and resources for parents. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development planning team, and teacher leaders, per-session opportunities for teacher work after school and summer, data tracking tools, protocol for looking at student work/data for teacher team meetings, common school-wide assessments and rubrics, time for teacher inter-visitations, programming/scheduling adjustments, SBO for ELT-as needed. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teacher team meetings will reflect rigorous protocols for looking at student work resulting in thoughtful lessons that show evidence of meeting the needs of all students. Teacher teams will also highlight the impact of their team’s inquiry work on student achievement by using a reflective process. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Rolling agendas and documentation from Inquiry Teacher Team presentations. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection: Our NYC School Survey Report findings, aligned to the 'Effective School Leadership' element of the Framework for Great Schools, shows that our school will use data as a tool for improving teacher practice and consistently analyze student work and assessments to enhance the curricula and instruction, with the expected result that students will demonstrate success in ELA and Math, promoting middle school readiness. School Strengths:  Based on our 2017-2018 Quality Review findings an area of strength lies in Quality Review indicator 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision. Leadership is being distributed among the new assistant Principals and lead teachers, where APs and lead teachers help facilitate team meetings and are engaged in key decisions regarding student learning.  The school also received a 'Proficient' rating in Quality Review indicators 1.4 (School Culture); 1.3, 3.1; 4.1; and 5.1 'Proficient', which are all within the umbrella of 'Systems for Improvement.'  Our school's strength this year is also in the use of inquiry protocols from Data Wise to guide and assist teachers in translating the collected data to identify next-steps for improving pedagogical practice. We have set high expectations directly aligned to our 2017-2018 Instructional Focus for all staff, students, parents, and stakeholders. We shall continue using the Danielson Framework as a guide to provide teachers with professional development and resource supported feedback to improve pedagogical practices. Finally we will use multiple means to communicate, share data, and resources aligned with the Instructional Focus with staff and parents. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  School Needs:  An area of focus according to our 2017-2018 Quality Review finding is:  An area of focus is to continue to refine our formative and summative assessments tracking to empower students to self assess and reflect on their learning and to make their learning and work visible, as well as use multiple means to communicate, share data, and resources aligned with the Instructional Focus with staff and parents.  An area of focus according to our School Quality Guide is to have students internalize the use of "next steps" established with their teachers during small group or 1:1 conferencing so that they become actively involved in their learning process.  The school received a 'Developing' in Quality Review indicators 1.1 (Curriculum), 1.2 (Pedagogy) and 2.2 (Assessment) State Recommendations: Beginning October 16, 2017, the principal and her instructional team will begin to articulate the school’s instructional focus to all staff, families, and students. By October 20, 2017, the team should have the stated focus in multiple formats, which should be disseminated to all school community members. This goal was completed in the 2017-2018 school year and will continue to be refined in the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Our vision for effective school leadership is to make our school's instructional and behavioral expectations and 'look fors' very clear to all stakeholders. A focus of our Instructional Cabinet and Instructional Leadership Team will be to collaborate with FSC and external coaches on cycles of professional development and coaching within our 2018-2019 Professional Development Plan to support all teachers. During informal and formal observation the lesson plan will be collected and reviewed to see how data has informed its construct. During weekly PLC meetings, teachers will be expected to produce and speak to classroom data and how it informs teaching, planning, and learning. School leaders will also ensure that teachers have time to participate in collaborative learning opportunities on Monday afternoons and Tuesday afternoons . During the week, our teachers will also be given time to meet in collaborative teacher teams based on subject matter and by grade level. During the day, teachers will meet a minimum of once a week to collaborate on lesson plans and adjustments to their curriculum using Understanding by Design (UBD) as a guide and best practice for lesson and unit planning. Advance teacher observation reports /findings: Teacher reports will be organized by the Danielson Domain that the teacher is found to be rated as developing/ineffective. Teacher observations will provide school leaders with information about who needs individualized or group support by JESA visits and school based support. IEPs will be read by each classroom teacher, substitute teacher, related service provider, and cluster teacher. Student educational goals will be assessed based on the criteria determined in the IEP. teachers/RS providers will provide instruction, support, and assessments that are aligned with the goals and management needs of each student as outlined in the IEP. Student portfolios: Each student portfolio will contain a copy of the documents described in the table of contents. Students will work to create work that is aligned with the rubrics. teachers will meet (conference) with students to provide specific feedback that will support and drive students' work to a higher level. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  C.S. 112, is focusing on literacy, our Science teacher participates in weekly teacher team meetings with the English Language Arts (ELA) teachers. School leaders and teacher teams will collaborate to enhance the school’s curriculum and programming to further support student achievement, before the start of the upcoming school year. Collaborative teacher teams will review data, current curriculum maps, and student work to determine the needed modifications to our curriculum maps, units of study, assessments, and promotional portfolio student work products. Our curricula will give all our scholars access to learning whether they are in the lowest performing or highest achieving groups of students through a rigorous and engaging curriculum for all levels of learners. School-wide expectations for teacher collaboration, instruction, inquiry work, curriculum modifications, student portfolios, assessments, bulletin boards, lesson planning, classroom environment, and PBIS will be clearly outlined and shared with teachers to clarify expectations for the 2018-2019 school year. Teachers and students will align to the high expectations outlined within the school’s PBIS framework. Our CBO will also be expected to support our staff, students, and parents/families, as needed. School leaders will also ensure that teachers are provided with time to collaborate within teacher teams to review student Lexile/F&P level growth and performance on extended writing question short and long response samples to track student learning and progress. School leaders will also ensure that they are providing teachers with effective, timely, and resourced feedback, throughout the 2018-2019 school year, regarding their instructional practices aligned to the Danielson Framework and rubric. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Collaborative leadership and building sustainability will continue to be a focus for the upcoming school year. School leaders share the responsibilities of ensuring that teachers are provided with support through meaningful feedback. School leaders work together to calibrate their observational techniques. School leaders attend weekly PLC meetings and support teachers as they are participating in data inquiry team meetings School leaders conduct observations of teachers practice and provide timely and specific feedback following each observation. Teachers are provided with resources to support the findings/feedback given. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Our vision for ensuring that everyone in our school has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, instructional focus, and equity focus expectations and 'look fors' based on the collaborative work within our Instructional Leadership Team/Cabinet. Teachers will receive a clarification of expectations for the 2018-2019 school year from the school leaders. The expectations will also be reviewed again with staff for clarification and any needed modification before the start of the new school year in late August and/or early September 2018. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? The school is currently building leadership capacity through its' assistant Principals, a Peer Collaborative teacher, and three Model teachers, SLT, Parent Coordinator/PA, and our CBO support staff. The supervisory team consists of the principal and 3 assistant principals. Their primary role is that of instructional leaders. This includes arranging and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  producing differentiated professional development opportunities to meet expressed and observed needs of the pedagogical staff. They also create the systems around which meaningful instruction is provided the opportunity to take place. They set the expectations and tone for a socially well adjusted and academically strong climate and culture in the school. They also establish cooperative and supportive bonds between the community and vested stakeholders within the school. The SLT (School Leadership Team) serves as a vehicle for assisting school administration in developing educational policies, and ensuring that resources are aligned to implement those policies. SLTs assists in the evaluation and assessment of educational programs and their effects on student achievement. Parent Coordinator (PC) creates a welcoming and supportive environment for parents. Our PC arranges seminars and provide training opportunities to encourage and develop and engage more parents as critical stakeholders in our school. The PC also reports on and helps to coordinate community events designed to encourage family engagement and promote civic mindedness. The Peer Collaborative teacher is offered to an effective pedagogue to take on a leadership role by influencing the instructional practice of his or her colleagues via observation and peer partnering. The diverse experiences of the partners enhances the exchanges and collaboration, making for a robust and effective experience. Model teachers serve a similar role as Peer Collaborative Teachers, in that they also model effective practice and planning in a forum in which they can demonstrate effective classroom procedure and pedagogy. Finally, the CBO staff serve to support the efforts of administrators, staff, and parents to provide high levels of instruction, socio-emotional and mental health services to children. This includes but is not limited to mentoring, after school programs, academic and behavioral interventions and strategies, coaching, curriculum support, and professional development to name but a few. School leaders will also continue to partnered with instructional coaches from FSC and other external coaches to provide teachers with cycles of professional development and one-on-one coaching opportunities for teachers. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? School leaders will foster collaborative school governance processes to ensure full family participation in collaboration with our CBO, Parent Coordinator, and Parent Association, teachers, and school staff. Collaborative school governance is also fostered by continuing to maintain an open door policy, which encourages parent / school interaction and communication with the principal. Through collaboration with our CBO, parent coordinator, Parent Association, teachers, and school staff, our families will have a variety of sources to encourage their participation and provide support to the families in our community. The Parent Coordinator is responsible for creating a welcoming school environment for parents and provides information about community events and rallies that promote civic awareness. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Timely feedback will be given aligned to Advance teacher observation guidelines and mandates. Our Teacher Development and Effectiveness Coach (TDEC) will conduct mandated Job Embedded Supports for Advance (JESA) visits to help school leaders with calibration and effective teacher feedback, as needed, By October 2018, a teacher observation calendar will be developed by the principal and Assistant Principals, outlining the frequency of observations, so that school leaders remain 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  on track towards completion of all observations by the June 2019 deadline. Teacher observations will be conducted in cycles, An observation calendar will be developed by October 2018. Cycle 1 of the observation calendar will be conducted between Septemberand December of 2018. What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance teacher observation reports/findings IEPs and student portfolios JESA visits FSC IEP liaison, and Assistant Principal, RTI team, SIT team TDEC, principal, Assistant Principal, DSR FSC liaison for IEPs, principal, Assistant Principal, teachers, teacher leaders, SIT team, RTI team How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Teachers will be programmed based on their license and certification areas, ensuring students' needs are met. Per-session opportunities will also be used to provide teachers with additional professional development and/or work time to support teacher practice, curriculum development, PBIS, and/or student achievement. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By October 2019, Assistant Principals will partner with Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) members and/or external coaches to ensure that 75% of their assigned teacher improve a minimum of one rating on Danielson components 1e, 3b, 3c, and/or 3d by June 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46 List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Achievement Benchmarks Performance Index on State Math Exam Student Achievement Benchmarks Performance Index on State ELA Exam Quality Review Instructional Core indicators 1,1, 1.2, 2.2 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Quality Review Instructional Core indicators & ELA/Math Renewal performance and proficiency benchmarks August 2018- October 2018 Principal, APs and DSR All Teachers The principal and Assistant Principals will create a 2018-2019 teacher observation calendar with observation completion target benchmarks to be monitored on a monthly basis by the DSR (calendar to be completed by October 2018). Teachers and students Quality Review Instructional Core indicators & ELA/Math Renewal performance and proficiency benchmarks September 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs, FSC and external coaches How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-ins between the principal and DSR Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-ins between the principal and DSR Teachers will incorporate I.M.P.R.E.S.S ‘look fors’ within their instructional planning and will use formal and informal observation feedback given by school leaders and coaches to improve their own practice aligned to Danielson components 1e, 3b, 3c, and 3d. CBO support staff working directly with students and teachers in classrooms will attend as many CBO staff Quality Review Instructional Core indicators & ELA/Math Renewal performance September 2018- June 2019 Principal, APs and CBO Director Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-ins 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48 and proficiency benchmarks between the principal and DSR Monday and Tuesday professional development opportunities provided at the school; helping to improve their own practice and instructional knowledge to better support their assigned teacher. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. CBO Director and Parent Coordinator will be developing a September 2018- June 2019 year long plan for monthly family/parent events that will include and target academic and socio-emotional needs of students through the sharing of school information, school family/student services and resources for parents. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TDEC, DSR, school coaches, external coaches, school leaders, teacher leaders, teacher inter-visitations, student portfolios, New Visions tool, RSCEP, new Assistant Principals, Advance teacher observation website/portal. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, Assistant Principals will summarize and report on their Advance teacher observation data to show progress and movement of at least 50% of their assigned teachers on components 1e, 3b, 3c, 3d. This information will be shared with and monitored by the principal and DSR during each of the four RSCEP check-ins. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Teacher observations data reports aligned to Danielson Framework. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection: Our NYC School Survey Report findings, aligned to the 'Strong Family & Community Ties' element of the Framework for Great Schools, shows that our school School Strengths:  Based on our 2017-2018 Quality Review findings our areas of strength are parent outreach. C.S. 112 has created a parent handbook, distributes a monthly calendar accompanied by a newsletter and sends home bi-weekly folders/communication logs to parents. There are monthly Parent Association meetings as well as Family Day/Nights led by the Parent Coordinator in collaboration with the CBO.  Based on our 2017-2018 School NYC Survey our school's strengths are Strong family community ties and trust. School Needs:  An area of focus according to our 2017-2018 Quality Review is increased participation in community events.  An area of focus according to our NYC School Survey data findings include improving on developing a supportive environment in which all vested stakeholders feel that their concerns are being seriously considered and resources are being put in place to ensure school initiatives are accounted for. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50   An area of focus according to our School Quality Guide is to close the achievement gap through rigorous instruction and professional development resulting in our students moving beyond the lower third percentile in the City. State IIT Recommendations: By December 1, 2018, work with parent coordinator and other involved leadership to design a method for collecting data (attendance, parent survey, interest data, and needs assessments) and feedback from families and parent support organizations. Create a time line for data collection, analysis to inform next steps. This was completed this school year and will continue to be refine in the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Within the Community School model, all families will be welcomed into the school community. School safety officers and all staff will align to PBIS initiatives creating a welcoming environment for our school community. School leaders, staff, Parent Coordinator, and the CBO will collaborate to provide support to families so that they understand and can take an active role in their child’s academic and socio-emotional development. The school leaders, Parent Coordinator, and CBO Director will collaborate to engage the community and families through interest surveys to develop workshops, informational parent classes, and support services based on the needs identified by the parents and community. Teachers will be able to learn from families about the children being taught through more student-centered and student-led Parent/Teacher conferences. Our CBO will help us to find effective ways to partner with families to support student success. School leaders will ensure that there continues to be a dedicated space for the CBO and for families within the school building. Our CBO will help us to continue gathering information from our parents on programs, workshops, trainings, and services they would like to participate in within the school to engage and increase parent involvement with our school community. The school leaders will also purchase and integrate an online grade book and Class Dojo, to provide students and parents with home access to up-to-date student information and student work progress. Our CBO will also expand use of social media outlet like Facebook, Instagram and/or Twitter to promote school events with parents and other community stakeholders. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Within the Community School model, all families will be welcomed into the school community. School safety officers and all staff will align to PBIS initiatives creating a welcoming environment for our school community. School leaders, staff, Parent Coordinator, and the CBO will collaborate to provide support to families so that they understand and can take an active role in their child’s academic and socio-emotional development. The school principal will also continue to invest resources for school beautifaction projects in order to keep creating an aesthetically pleasing , safe and welcoming school building. The school leaders, Parent Coordinator, and CBO Director will collaborate to engage the community and families through interest surveys to develop workshops, informational parent classes, and support services based on the needs 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  identified by the parents and community. Teachers will be able to learn from families about the children being taught through more student-centered and student-led Parent/Teacher conferences. Our CBO will help us to find effective ways to partner with families to support student success. School leaders will ensure that there continues to be a dedicated space for the CBO and for families within the school building. Our CBO will help us to continue gathering information from our parents on programs, workshops, trainings, and services they would like to participate in within the school to engage and increase parent involvement with our school community. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? The school leaders in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator,and CBO support staff will identify ways to develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures through involvement with the Parent Association and School Leadership Team (SLT). How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The school leaders in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator, PA, and CBO support staff will engage the community and family through monthly events, workshops, parent classes, informational sessions, and/or activities for parents and families. Teachers will also have a designated parent outreach time to reach out to parents to learn from families about the children being taught (logs will be used to document parent outreach by teachers). What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Parent Teacher Conferences Community School Forum School Open Door Policy Parents and /or family members are given the opportunity to meet with their child's teachers to discuss their progress. Parents and families are invited to attend a forum where they can meet teachers and staff to learn about various programs and events going on at the school. Parents and student also receive progress reports at this time. Parents may come to the school during school hours to schedule a meeting with their child's teacher and/or principal or AP. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parent Association and SLT Family partnerships with CBO: CBO-YMCAand Astor Services partnerships 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52  Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes. There is a roomassigned to the CBO. There is also a family room and twomulti-purpose rooms withinthe school that serve as spaces formeeting/conferencing areas. Astor clinician also has their own space. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? ASTOR and CBO-YMCA are providing parent/family events aligned to socio-emotional and academic supports. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Families receive progress reports throughout the school year to ensure that families are knowledgeable of their children's scholastic success. The school leaders are also looking into purchasing and integrating an online grade book and will also continue use of ClassDojo. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. From September 2018-June 2019, the Community Based-Organization (CBO) will collaborate with the Parent Coordinator and Parent Association to host a minimum of one monthly event, workshop, informational session, forum, class, or meeting for parents and/or families, resulting in a 10% increase of parents responding positively on the ‘Strong Family & Community Ties’ section of the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve - Renewal Lead Indicator- Supportive Environment benchmark NYC School Survey- Strong Family & Community Ties benchmark Quality Review indicator 1.4 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) CBO staff and Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) NYC School Survey- Strong Family & Community Ties July 2018- June 2019 Principal, CBO Director, PC, and DSR Parents Quality Review indicator 1.4 September 2018- June 2019 Teachers, Principal and APs CBO Director and Parent Coordinator Renewal Lead Indicator- Supportive Environment benchmark September 2018- June 2019 Principal, DSR, CBO Director, Parent Coordinator The principal will ensure that the CBO Director and Parent Coordinator communicate with the Leadership Cabinet on a weekly basis to report on their work and plans for parents through a weekly email summary and/or bi-weekly check-in. Teachers will use Class Dojo to help reach out to and inform parents of monthly events/workshops for parents being provided at the school. A monthly parent events calendar will be shared with teachers by the Parent Coordinator and/or CBO Director. DSR and principal will check-in with the CBO Director and Parent Coordinator together on a monthly basis to receive updates and to address any concerns regarding school plans for engaging parents. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-ins with principal and DSR Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-ins with principal and DSR Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-ins with principal and DSR 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54 School leaders NYC School Survey- Strong Family & Community Ties September 2018- August 2019 Principal, DSR, CBO Director, Parent Coordinator Quality Review indicator 1.4 Quarterly RSCEP goals and benchmark check-ins with principal and DSR CBO Director will collaborate with the Parent Coordinator to send a weekly email to school leaders (principal, APs, and DSR) summarizing important highlights and upcoming events. The CBO staff will also work on advertising and highlighting positive events happening at the school through social media and advertising special school events in the community. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. CBO support, CBO Director, ELT, communication and data tools for families, parent and family interest surveys, parent workshops, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, ClassDojo, New Vision Tool, and NYC School accounts for parents. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA X Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. February 2018, school leaders, Parent Coordinator, and the CBO Director will present the multiple means by which the school has worked to increase parent involvement for the 2018-2019 school year (Examples: calendar of parent events, parent outreach logs, parent interest surveys, agendas fro parent workshops, CBO services for parents/families, school events, Family Nights, informational sessions/forums, etc) and will provide documentation of parent outreach and parent participation at school events for the September 2018-February 2019 time period. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Calendar of parent events, parent outreach logs, parent interest surveys, agendas fro parent workshops, CBO services for parents/families, and documentation of parent outreach and parent participation at school events for the September 2016-February 2017 time period in support of our annual goal of 10% improvement. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. From September 2018-June 2019, the Community Based-Organization (CBO) will collaborate with the Parent Coordinator and Parent Association to host a minimum of one monthly event, workshop, informational session, forum, class, or meeting for parents and/or families, resulting in a 10% increase of parents responding positively on the ‘Strong Family & Community Ties’ section of the NYC School Survey. Our CBO will support us in ensuring that our parents and community are informed of the academic, socio-emotional, mental health, medical services and other support services available to them and their children within the school. The ELT programs for the 2018-2019 school year will focus on the following components: 1. Parent Involvement 2. Attendance 3. Academics 4. Social, emotional, mental health, medical services 5. Expanding learning activities 1). The parents will be given a list of topics for workshops that meet the needs of the community that will reflect both the academic and social emotional needs. We are planning a Job Fair in the winter and a Health Fair for the Spring. A Breast Cancer Awareness Day has also been set aside in the Spring of 2019 for those parents interested in being screened. To address the social and emotional needs of our Community, Astor will work with parents, students and teachers. 2). Attendance is a major concern to the school and CBO. Attendance will be increased by at least 1-2%. Certificates will be presented to students who achieve both Perfect Attendance and 90% or better, as well as a "Almost There" 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  certificate for those children with 80% or better. The parents of these students will be honored as part of the celebration. To help address the attendance issues phone calls will be made to both chronically absent and late students. Logs of phone calls will collected and monitored. Incentives will be given out for improved attendance and lateness. Lateness will be monitored to make certain that students are given credit for their attendance. A meeting with both parents and students will be held to discuss their attendance. Students will be invited to attend trips monthly as a reward for Good Attendance. Parents will also be called to congratulate them for there effort in ensuring that their children are present in school 3). Social, emotional, mental health, medical service - To support the community , a full time clinic will be spearheaded by the Astor Mental Health. A health fair will be used to address the needs of the community around health. 5). Learning Time Activities - A number of programs were brought in as part of collaboration between the school and CBO. These programs will be on a rotational basis so that children would be exposed to many enriched activities. Intramural teams will be created in basketball,baseball, and volleyball. The groups supporting the arts at CS 112 sponsored through the CBO are:  Basketball   Step Dancing Inside Broadway Academics will be addressed Tuesday -Friday within the afterschool programs. Dates will be set aside for family night and Community School Forums. Student government will be formulated for the second year at CS 112. Children will meet on a regular basis and voice their concerns about the school. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Our Expanded Learning Time will be compulsory for 75% of students during the 2018-2019 school year. This year, Pre-K was excluded from participation. Academics will be monitored by the Community School Director and Principal. Results will be placed on a Data Wall for review and analysis. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57   Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? ● C.S. 112x’s, Expanded Learning Time (ELT) will include a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce reported incidents and suspensions, and increases the likelihood of students meeting promotional criteria. ● Our ELT will actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. Our partnership with our CBO will help to address these needs. ● Multiple content areas academic support for students and extra-curricular opportunities will be offered to students. ● C.S. 112x’s ELT will contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art, in collaboration with our CBO. ● School leaders in collaboration with our CBO Director will ensure our ELT instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. ● School leaders and the CBO Director will discuss and create a plan for how community educators will receive professional development. Plan will include joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff, as needed. ● Parent Coordinator, school leaders, and the CBO director will collaborate on multiple ways to keep parents informed of ELT opportunities for their children provided by the school. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The school administration will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program. The CBO Director, school leaders, and school staff will evaluate the program throughout the 2018-2019 school year to assess impact on student achievement using i-ready assessment results and unit assessments at the BOY, MOY and EOY. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  ELT begins on the first day of school when the students September 2018 till the the last day of school June 2019. A time line will be established to help support the effectiveness of our program assessing 3x a year September January and May. Data Charts /Data walls will be displayed to reflect both progress and student needs once the data is analyzed. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. CBO Director and support staff, teachers, schedule adjustments, programming and budget adjustments, per-session postings for teachers, school aides and paraprofessionals. Funding is needed for school aides who are responsible for bussing after the ELT program and Paraprofessionals who are responsible for the data entry and attendance during the program. The AP will need assistance in scheduling of teachers who are absent from the program. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks During the midpoint benchmark of Jan - 2019, modifications and enhancements to the ELA and Math curriculum maps for all grades will show evidence of all of the following: Emphasis on Common Core focus standards for the ELA and math; scaffolds included for ENL/ELLs and SWDs; integration of Teachers College reading and writing units; embedded structured independent reading time; Depth of Knowledge (DOK) level 3/4 end of unit performance tasks, benchmark assessments as evidenced by iReady, and Engage to document growth in reading, writing, and math by the EOY testing window. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, school leaders in collaboration with the school’s Community Based-Organization (CBO) will use multiple means of communication to inform parents and families of their child’s progress, school events, programs, and services available to them in or near the school, resulting in a 10% increase of parents responding positively on the ‘Strong Family & Community Ties’ section of the NYC School Survey. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve strong family community ties according to our school survey report. Use data to determine whether the benchmarks were met-- will consist of attendance sheets of all school events, parent surveys, and PTA feedback. Attendance benchmark of 92.3% or more Quality Review indicator 1.4 and 5.1 Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service CBO- YMCA Bottom 3rd percent of students in ELA and Math and chronically absent students Attendance, socio-emotional supports for students/parents, parent/ family engagement, after-school programming, academic supports, mental health, school beautification, and advertising/marketing of school on social media CBO- Astor Services for Families & Children TBD once new CBO is in place TBD once new CBO is in place TBD once new CBO is in place TBD once new CBO is in place TBD once new CBO is in place TBD once new CBO is in place TBD once new CBO is in place Tier 3 Students and their parents Mental health and family services - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  2. 3. 4. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 1. As a Renewal School we are expected to pair with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. Our school will be partnering with YMCA The principal and CBO Director will lead implementation of the needs and asset assessment, and other critically important coordinating activities, this information will be shared with the SLT at the monthly SLT meetings. 2. As a Renewal School we are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the needs and asset assessments. We will be embedding Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming in partnership with our CBO. Over the summer of 2018, school leaders will inform the CBO of the needs of the school and will share their RSCEP with the CBO. The school leaders and CBO director will meet to maximize the use of the additional ‘Renewal Hour’ embedded within the school schedule. School leaders and CBO Director will align the supports and budget to help meet the goals within the school’s RSCEP. 3. As a Renewal School we are expected to emerge as a Partnership School, where parents and families feel welcome, attend parent-teacher conferences, participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Our CBO will help to provide Monthly Forums to engage families and community stakeholders in order to increase parent engagement. Parent interest surveys will be created and distributed by our CBO to gather important information that will help us determine what support services are most needed by our families. The surveys and community outreach will help us to develop a plan with our CBO to improve parent involvement and engagement within our school and campus. 4. The principal will meet on a weekly basis with the Community School Director, Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. The school will use the New Visions data tool provided to all Renewal/RISE schools this year and will the principal will ensure the CBO Director also gets training for using this tool as well. The data tool will be used as one source to streamline tracking of student data. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  *New CBO-YMCA is in transition. CBO Director was just hired but has not started yet. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students ● The key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the Community School program will be our school’s CBO Director in collaboration with the principal, Assistant Principal, SLT, DSR, school-based support staff, and other community partners our CBO brings in to support our school. There will be weekly meetings using the data sorter as the main source of ensuring interventions are aligned to student needs and provided. ● Our CBO will be a critical partner in increasing our parent involvement. The CBO Director will also be an integral partner in the programming, planning, and integration of the mandated ELT and Saturday Academy academic supports and activities. ● During the 2018-2019 school year, the SLT, CBO Director, DSR, and the Superintendent will do multiple evaluations of the ELT program, and the partnership with the CBO to assess overall impact on student achievement. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program are as follows: CBO, CBO Director, Education Specialist, school-based support staff, budget/programming for ELT and Saturday Academy as a per session activity, and data tracking tools. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. July 2018- June 2019 Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) 3x a week during the school day 3X a week after school ELT iReady Imagine Learning small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) 3X a week during the school day ELT i-Ready Math 3x a week during school the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in Grades K – 2 who are considered at-risk for not meeting State standards as determined by their performance on TCRWP and iReady or other identified assessments, or who have been identified as potential holdovers. Students in Grades 3 – 5 who are performing at Level 1 or Level 2 on Common Core State (ELA) and MOSL assessments. Students in Grades K – 2 who are considered at-risk for not meeting State standards as determined by their performance on the baseline assessment from Go Math! or other identified assessments, or who have been identified as potential holdovers. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students in Grades 3 – 5 who are performing at Level 1 or Level 2 on New York State Mathematics, assessments and NYCbaseline assessment NYC Performance Assessment in Science Grade 4 or identified assessments, or who have been identified as potential holdovers. Identified assessments, or who have been identified as potential holdovers. Individual and small group counseling as needed before and during school hours x x small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) 2X a week during the school day small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) 2x a week during the school day Guidance Counselor and Astor Services for targeted students small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) As needed based on individual student need 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 11 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Each STH student will be assigned a Success Mentor for the 2018-2019 school year. Students are afforded book bags and school supplies and uniforms furnished by the school and students are given homework help during the school day in order to be prepared for the following school day. They will receive one to one counseling and tutoring services and contact information for staff to support them, as needed. Parent meeting are available to support parents in areas of need. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Attend teacher fairs to recruit teachers and other pedagogues ● New Teachers are assigned a coach during their first two years. A log of assistance is completed and submitted to the school leaders each month. ● New Teachers and mentors log in their hours on the (Teacher Mentoring System) to meet their requirement. ● Teachers attend in-house and outside Professional Development ● Use of teacher professional development ● A program schedule that builds common planning time, departmental conferences, and grade conferences ● 100% of teachers at C.S. 112x are highly qualified 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). - Professional Development plan developed monthly for professional development sessions for staff - Instructional Rounds- teacher inter-visitations - Teachers College training - Borough Field Support Center liaisons support for ENL and SWDs - Professional learning provided by lead teachers and content coaches 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Parents of students transitioning to Kindergarten will be given the opportunity in the spring to come in and network with the kindergarten teachers and see the classrooms that the students will be transitioning to. During this meeting the parents are given the opportunity to ask questions and review some of the programs that the students will be required to access during the school year. The school will hold an open house for parents to come in and see the school. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Measures of Students Learning (MOSL) Committee along with administration will continue to work with teachers in the selection of their MOSL state and local selections, and adjustments requested by teachers will be made as needed. School leaders will also collaborate with teachers to continue refining student portfolio tasks based on review of student work products. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 340,112 x 56,165 X x x 2,533,593 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X x X X x x X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5 Parts -b,c,d,e x Section 5 - parts a,b,c,d,e X X X Section 5a Part 5b, Section 5b Part 5b, Section 5c part 5b Section 5d part 5b Section 5e part 5b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students C.S. 112 agrees to implement the following statutory requirements:  The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children.  The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school-parent compact consistent with section 1118(d) of the ESSA.  The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan. The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement, by:  Providing parent workshops: computer technology, test taking strategies and techniques  TCRWP Benchmark Assessments  Parent Tutoring Program 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  Book Club  Parent Coordinator and Family Worker outreach The school will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, principal and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with, and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools, by:  Continuing Family Nights    International Luncheon Senior citizen outreach School Leadership Team and sub-committees The school will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities with public preschool and other programs, and conduct other activities, such as parent resource centers, that encourage and support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children, by: the use of Family letters   Parent Volunteers  Family Worker The school will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent- programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand: Informational bulletins from the region and chancellor about upcoming events  Parent Monthly Newsletters and Calendars   Principal’s monthly newsletters and calendars that are sent home.  Flyers of in-house and/or community programs regarding workshops, classes for children and adults, health clinics in the school and/or in the community – all flyers pertinent to the well-being of the family will be translated in the home languages of the students. Field trip reminders.  Notes sent home to parents from the school, classroom teachers, school nurse, and administration.   Directions for completing projects, assignments, homework, and class work expectations.  The teachers’ comments and/or observations can be recorded in the home language on the student’s report card.  These translations will be provided by in-house school staff.  Bilingual Parent Coordinator and Family Worker  The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. C.S. 112 will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: learning walks, Quality Review, collaboration and consultation of the CEP, PTA/principal meetings, human resources committee, and development of parent/community workshops, Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  C.S. 112 will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance. Some examples of these activities are listed below: Open House Pre- K Parent Meetings Hispanic Heritage Holiday Concert Talent Shows Family Night Getting Your Child Ready for the ELA Showcases Informational Meetings Parent Book Club Intervention Fair Children’s Health Issues Breast Cancer Awareness Reading Workshop (Pre-K. K and 1st grade) National Volunteer Week Movie Night Open House SLT Pre- K Parent Meetings Hispanic Heritage Getting Your Child Ready for the ELA Family Book Donations PTA meetings-Promotional Criteria Game Night Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement School-level parent involvement is implemented by the following:  In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand.  The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition:  Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring that 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning; that parents have received all information about our new School-wide Extended Learning Time program; that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the ESSA. o The school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. C.S. 112 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: School actively involves parents in teaching and learning as members of School Leadership Team, as resources in the school and as tutors in school programs. Through a newsletter printed in English and Spanish as well as a bilingual telephone message service and hotline parents can find out about current events at the school. To help families deal with the many external pressures that have an impact on school achievement the school offers the assistance of our bilingual parent coordinator, bilingual family worker, health intern, guidance counselor and SBST all of whom can provide support and referrals to community-based organizations. C.S. 112 will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. The PA will develop and circulate a Parent Needs Survey in English and Spanish. They will collect, evaluate and prioritize the community’s needs. This information will be reported to the full School Leadership Team at a meeting prior to the writing of the RSCEP. A sub-committee of parents and teachers will be formed to write that section of the RSCEP. An action plan will be developed for its implementation. (List actions, such as describing how the evaluation will be conducted, identifying who will be responsible for conducting it, and explaining what role parents will play) School-Parent Compact (SPC) C.S. 112 and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) (participating children), agree that this compact outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for improved student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the State’s high standards. This school-parent compact is in effect during school year 2018-2019. The school-parent compact will be distributed to parents during parent-teacher conferences in November 2018. An annual review of the school-parent compact will be conducted in May 2018. C.S. 112 will: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  o Participate in all regional educational initiatives o Adhere to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) o Differentiate instruction to meet the needs of all students o Mainstream students wherever possible I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 1. Hold parent-teacher conferences twice yearly during which this compact will be discussed as it relates to the individual child’s achievement. Specifically, those conferences will be held in November and March 2. Provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: phone conferencing, on-going parent/teacher conferencing, issuance of the students’ report cards (3 times yearly, on-going access to the Princeton Review assessment results.] 3. Provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows: Parents are invited to meet with staff during parent/ teacher conferences and during any scheduled appointment time throughout the year. 4. Provide parents opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities, as follows: during class trips and class projects, assembly programs , Open School Week 5. Involve parents in the planning, review, and improvement of the school’s parental involvement policy, in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 1. Involve parents in the joint development of any School wide Program plan (for SWP schools), in an organized, ongoing, and timely way. 2. Hold an annual meeting to inform parents of the school’s participation in Title I, Part A programs, and to explain the Title I, Part A requirements, and the right of parents to be involved in Title I, Part A programs. The school will convene the meeting at a convenient time to parents, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings, such as in the morning or evening, so that as many parents as possible are able to attend. The school will invite to this meeting all parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs (participating students), and will encourage them to attend. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 1. Provide information to parents of participating students in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon the request of parents with disabilities, and, to the extent practicable, in a language that parents can understand. 2. Provide to parents of participating children information in a timely manner about Title I, Part A programs that includes a description and explanation of the school’s curriculum, the forms of academic assessment used to measure children’s progress, and the proficiency levels students are expected to meet. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  3. On the request of parents, provide opportunities for regular meetings for parents to formulate suggestions, and to participate, as appropriate, in decisions about the education of their children. The school will respond to any such suggestions as soon as practicably possible. 4. Provide to each parent an individual student report about the performance of their child on the State assessment in at least math, language arts and reading. 5. Provide each parent timely notice when their child has been assigned or has been taught for four (4) or more consecutive weeks by a teacher who is not highly qualified within the meaning of the term in section 200.56 of the Title I. We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities o Encouraging positive attitudes toward school. o Monitoring attendance o Making sure that homework is completed o Providing a quiet place to do homework o Monitoring amount of television our children watch o Volunteering in my child’s classroom o Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education o Promoting positive use of my child’s extracurricular time o Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate o Serving, to the extent possible, on policy advisory groups, such as being the Title I, Part A parent representative on the school’s School Improvement Team, the Title I Policy Advisory Committee, the District wide Policy Advisory Council, the State’s Committee of Practitioners, the School Support Team or other school advisory or policy groups We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve our academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will: III. Student Responsibilities o Do my homework every day and ask for help when I need it o Read at least 30 minutes every day outside of school time o Give to my parents or the adult who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information received by me from my school every day 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  o Follow the C.S. 112 Discipline Code o Attend school regularly 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name The Bronxwood School Borough select one School Number 112 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Andrea Tucci Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sharon Burton Teacher/Subject Area Latoya Walker/C.B./ Technology Teacher/Subject Area Fosua Apprey/ Psychologist Related-Service Provider Victoria Whitfield, SETSS/IEP Superintendent Meisha Porter Assistant Principal Marvin Jennings Coach N/A School Counselor Zetsey Ouk Parent Anastasia Guadalupe Parent Coordinator Ayoka Singleton Field Support Center Staff Member Nancy Saffer Other (Name and Title) Lou Ramunni, Director CBO C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 370 Total number of ELLs 22 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.95% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Formative assessments are driven by teacher observation and review of authentic reading, writing, speaking, and listening tasks, in the ENL classroom. They can provide information on individuals overall strengths and weaknesses, identify students' instructional level; inform instructional groupings; inform lesson planning; gauge immediate learning and interest. To this end, we can elicit evidence of learning in a manner appropriate to students English language proficiency. Formative assessments or curriculum embedded assessments which are being used at C.S. 112 in grades K-%, include Fountas and Pinnell, (BOY, MOY, EOY), iReady (Computerized format) in reading and Math, Ready (Written format), which simulate the NYS Exams; Sound Reading for Grade 3 only; Max Scholar for SWD's- RTI & for all Grade 2LL's; NYSITELL; Ready Gen Literacy and Go Math- Pre and Post Assessments, TCRWP Benchmarks / Running Records and Pre / Post Unit Tests. our RSCEP 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  (Renewal School Comprehensive Education Plan) includes the following goal in the area of "Rigorous Instruction." In the current year, school leaders and teachers will collaborate to enhance the existing Common Core Aligned curricula for all scholars, as evidenced by an increase in the average student proficiency rates in ELA and Math in the state exams. In addition, by February 2018, modifications and enhancements to the ELA and Math (as per the School Enacted Curriculum independent reading time, and Depth of Knowledge (DOK) level 3 / 4 end of unit performance tasks. With the above in mind, we will use specific assessment tools to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLS a, including the Ready Gen ELA program and GO Math! Also, we have the NYSESLAT / ESL exam i the spring, with the growth used as our4 M.O. S. L. , for the 2017 --2019 school years. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? C.S. 112's school wide structures of support are used to guide instructional planning for all ELLs. All teachers use these assessments daily as tools for improving teacher practice and for consistent analysis of student work, so as to enhance the curriculum and instruction. To this end, students will demonstrate increased achievement in ELA and Math promoting middle school readiness. Our instructional focus for school leaders includes clarification of school's expectations for ELLs, instructional focus for ELLs and CEP goals for school community. School leaders provided differentiated professional development opportunities, including PD aligned to the school's instructional focus. They provide teachers with actionable and resourced feedback on their instructional practice with an extra focus on Danielson 1e, 3b, 3c and 3d. School leaders attend professional development sessions sponsored by the district, as well as other institutes for administrators including TC (Teachers' College). Teachers plan common core aligned lessons with pre-planned questions and student discussion opportunities. They also participate in collaborative teacher-team inquiry work aligned to Data-Wise Teachers attend professional development and use school wide strategies to enhance practice around Danielson 3b. They align instruction to the school's instructional focus. Professional development cycles include Teacher Team Inquiry Data-Wise; Effective Questioning and Discussion; FSC (Field Support Center) ENL PD Cycle; Field Support Special Ed PD Cycle; and, Teachers' College PD. Fountas and Pinnell is used as a measure of student learning (MOSL) three times a year (Beginning of Year, Middle of Year and End of Year) to assess students reading levels. A report demonstrates a comparison of the October and January F&P scores. Teachers use math unit tests and Go Math pre and post assessments. This data is used to inform curricular and pedagogical decisions. Rubrics and checklists are use daily in all subject areas to support student's in knowing next steps and how to improve their work. Feedback given to students is actionable and meaningful during one on one student interviews. iReady Reading & Mathematics are computer- based programs with a follow up written assessment. It is used every week for ELL students in grades K-5. It is a self-monitoring program used to assess and diagnose problems in reading and mathematics. A report is immediately available and generated by all teachers for use in planning, re teaching or enhancing instruction for ELLs and ELLs with IEPs. Ready GEN tracks students and lets teachers see, in a certain amount of time, any gains or lack thereof, using graphs, for example. It has text-based approaches to comprehension, based on the common core learning standards. The instructional practices are designed to guide our students to more effective use of close reading of texts, which is to lead to a deeper understanding of text meaning, author's intent, perspective and related comprehension goals. All are used to scaffold instruction for our ELLs. Go Math assessments are done as pre-tests, mid-chapter assessments and post tests. A BOY(Beginning of Year), MOY (Middle of Year) and an EOY (End of Year) are done in addition to monthly benchmark assessments. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Summative assessments include the Ell Periodic Assessments, given in the Fall and Spring of each year. Results, as soon as these assessments are scanned are immediately available for staff to see in details, where the Ells need further assistance and plan accordingly. NYC Performance Tasks in Reading and Math are given monthly to access concrete data to further drive 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  instruction. After iReady is done weekly by the children, teachers of Ells are immediately able to identify progress or areas of need of our Ells as a report /update is immediately available for THAT child, for staff to access. The report is thorough and includes information like the need of more phonics instruction for…….(particular child),,,,poor sentence structure for…(particular child). Citywide and State wide Summative Assessments also include the NYSITELL (New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners, in which eligible students must be tested within the first ten days of initial enrollment and whose purpose is to identify students who are entitled to bilingual/ENL programs. Between January and February, Ells in Grades K -2 are given the Gifted and Talented assessment, which qualifies applicants for admission to New York City Gifted and Talented district-wide and city-wide programs. This past year we had one Ell who took the test. In the spring, Ells in grades 3-8, with over a year in an English Language School System, are given the ELA(New York State English Language Arts) exam, which assesses student progress toward New York State's standards in English Language Arts. The New York State Mathematics exam is given to Ells in the spring, to assess students' progress toward New York State standards in Mathematics. All Ells, even if they have just arrived in the country, are given this assessment in either English or their home language, Spanish the second language of all Ells this past year from Grades 3-5 at C.S.112. In April and continuing in May, all Ells, K to 5 are tested in the NYSESLAT(New York State English as a Second Language). They are tested in Speaking, Listening, Reading and Writing, to measure student progress in developing English language proficiency. If an Ell tests out at the Commanding level, s(he) is entitled thereafter, to 2 more years of academic support at the school, in English as a New Language. The New York State Science Test is given in May and June. In May, Ells in Grade 4 do the performance test; and, in June, they are given the written section. This assessment, given in English and/or Spanish at C.S.112, is used to assess elementary Science programs and the students' progress toward New York State standards in Science. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data is gathered, teachers and parents meet to address the information. PLCs and Planning Teams meet on all grade levels, every week; Google Docs is used and all have access to notes and data and next steps planned to assist that child. R.T.I. may be discussed as another follow-up,if prior interventions as well as A.I.S.are inadequate. After the typical 6-week one-on-one preliminary R.T.I. program is done for that student, then the team meets again to analyze further data and to decide on next steps. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Response to Intervention is a multi-tiered approach to helping struggling students by providing increasing levels of interventions to address academic and/or behavior concerns. At CS 112, the RtI process begins when a teacher recognizes a student (or students) who are struggling with skill or lesson. His or her lack of proficiency in that skill makes it impossible for the student to provide evidence of learning. The teacher identifies the area of need for the student through assessments, sound and rigorous classroom instruction, and data analysis obtained from student work; all of which to be used in development of an action plan to address those concerns. In order for RtI to be successful, the teacher must understand and become familiar with what is offered at each tier of instruction. This knowledge helps a teacher know the responsibilities required throughout the process and recognize that a multi-tiered delivery model of instruction offers all students an opportunity to be successful. Tier one strategies at CS 112 include, but are not limited to management strategies (proximity seating, the use of exemplars, the use of anchor charts, PBIS) assessment (short quizzes offered frequently, review using similar test questions, post test analysis with the student, teaching and modeling test taking strategies) instructional (visual aids and manipulative use, RADD, use of highly leveraged and engaging materials, online resources, clear explanations/expectations, reminders to stay on task, acknowledging student effort) and other strategies such as conferencing, review of student's class notes, peer tutoring, homework help). Tier two work includes including the student in homogeneously arranged groups, small group pull out for skill development, assessment to track progress followed by requisite scaffolding and/or differentiation of material, and reading comprehension instruction. Tier two is organized in pre-determined cycles. Finally, a student designated to Tier three will be issued increased time for pull out or small group work to address areas of deficit and review student growth. Assessments are created based on data obtained by examining student progress. The success of our RtI process hinges on our use of data in assessing student need and growth. The RtI team uses a problem solving approach during both PLC's and RtI conferencing to assist in lesson planning and the development of instructional strategies to improve student performance. Such planning and strategy creation is based on data assessment. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  The data is also used to determine whether or not movement to higher tiers is necessary. Data is disaggregated and analyzed following each benchmark assessment or demonstrated need for re-teaching. AIS services can utilize the same information gleaned from the data utilized during RtI meetings and similarly, use that information to develop action plans for instruction or behavioral interventions. While being assessed, students are permitted to use a variety of methods of response to questions to provide evidence of learning. This is of particular importance with our Ell population. In order to meet Ells' needs in an RtI framework, it is important to understand their characteristics as children and learners as an asset to draw upon as well as a dynamic developmental process that is inextricably tied to learning opportunities. Unfortunately many educators have misconceptions about language and literacy development and these false notions can perpetuate a deficit view of Ells' ability to learn; namely, that it is a problem to be fixed rather than a learning resource. In addition to having an understanding of these misconceptions, it is essential for practitioners to investigate their students' educational and linguistic histories.Teachers need to build upon the linguistic capabilities students bring to the classroom and understand where challenges may lie. With this understanding of our Ells. At C.S.112, we take great pride as educators and effectively plan lessons with the assistance of the E.SL. teacher. Most Ells placed in Tier 3 are afforded that placement according to their lexile levels/ iReady test results. Intensive instruction is offered to all categories of Ells, but we especially target the over-aged ones. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. (This information will be updated in the Fall of 2017, to accommodate data gained from the results of the state exams administered in the Spring of 2017). Ell programs are developed based on classroom performance, classroom assessments with their primary teacher, and when applicable, NYSELAT data. All of these are used to determine the needs of our Ell students and then create programs and provide supports to meet their needs. Programs such as Imagine Learning as an example, have been acquired based on NYSELAT results and demonstrated classroom need. iReady, and Go Math can also provide the Ell instructor with data on student need and areas of needed improvement, leading to implementation of teaching strategies that will be used during push in, pull out, and with the primary teacher. The Ell instructor can use the data obtained from these resources and plan lessons that address requisite skills needed by the student to be successful. Working collaboratively with the student's primary teacher in PLCs provides the Ell teacher an opportunity to voice her concerns and have an action plan created that allows both the primary and Ell teachers address the student's needs. An examination of our RLAT results showed only 2 of our ELLs at the expanding level with all others entering or lower. This data is used to inform instructional practice and support for our Ells as well as how to best use the programs (ie Imagine Learning and iReady) currently in place to address their needs. Subgroups of Ells are organized based on their LabR/NYSELAT results and lesson planning and strategies for instruction are determined accordingly. As an example, our 2 students categorized as EX are given more mainstream work in their classes, less one on one work with the Ell instructor, and have work differentiated based on in-class assessments and a demonstrated ability to work proficiently without as many Ell based interventions. We are an elementary school and therefore our students have no high stakes Regents exams to take, however LTE's, SpEd Ells, have their previous year's NYSELAT scores evaluated (when applicable) and their proficiency levels with speaking/reading/writing English are assessed at the beginning of the year before placement and instructional strategies are put into place. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? (This information will be updated in the Fall of 2017, to accommodate data gained from the results of the state exams administered in the Spring of 2017). Ell information and dissemination of data regarding their needs and progress occurs during weekly PLC meetings and weekly meetings with administration/supervision. Based on the information shared, decisions are made regarding adjustments and changes to programs.Should an ELL student also have an IEP, findings are shared during regularly scheduled IEP meetings and with ICT teachers during PLC's. Parents are provided one to one conferencing with the ELL teacher to update progress and explain next steps. Imagine learning progress as well as suggestions for new initiatives to assist our ELL population, additional scheduling of pull out and push in, and resource/material acquisition occurs each week with supervisors where data on student progress is discussed and next steps are planned. At request, the ELL supervisor for District 11 is invited to attend meetings to offer input and suggestions on best practices and how to move forward with a proposed plan of action. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Freestanding ENL program. The heterogeneous E.N.L. Program at C.S.112 is based both on the integrated as well as the stand alone models and services grades K-5. Our ELLs are at the Entering, Emerging, Transitional and Expanding levels in English. We provide service to these ELLs via both stand alone and integrated scheduling. During our Stand alone service, ELLs are pulled from their classes as a part of their weekly schedule and provided language instruction and assistance. Each student is assessed and it is determined how much assistance is needed based on their levels of ability. An average of 180 minutes per week is provided for each ELL student as a part of their standalone service. Another 180 minutes, is provided during push in (integrated) instruction with their core teacher of English in an ICT model. Students are grouped according to grade and/or language proficiency levels and travel together as a group, for the standalone program with Entering and Emerging level Ells being given 180 of their 360 minutes of instruction at the same time, in K-1, 2- 3 and 4-5 leveled groups. Instruction is given in a least restrictive environment with vital support from staff members, including our teacher leaders and peer collaborative teacher, Leadership and Inquiry Teams, the Curriculum Committee, our CBO (Fordham University) personnel; and, our Ell Instructional Lead person from the Borough Field Support Center, working in conjunction with the teachers and staff. b. TBE program. If applicable. C.S.112 does not have a bilingual program at this time. c. DL program. If applicable. C.S.112 does not have a dual language program at this time 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? As per the new CR Part 154, explicit E.N.L. instruction is delivered to our 20 Ells thus: * Firstly, instruction in the integrated E.N.L. program will be by the certified Common Branches classroom teacher and the certified E.N.L. teacher, in the students' classrooms. Instruction in the standalone E.N.L. program will be in the E.N.L. room and done by the E.N.L. teacher. All instruction to our Ells will continue in English of course. * All 3 Kindergarteners who are at the entering and emerging stages of English, are placed with the 2 emerging students in Grade 1 and on a weekly basis, all of them receive 360 minutes total of E.S.L. instruction, on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays in their classrooms and in the E.N.L. room. The 3 at the expanding stage in both grades will receive E.N.L. instruction in the content areas in their classrooms. Grades 2 and 3 have 2 Emerging and 5 Expanding students together. They will be placed in the same standalone class and also given content area instruction in their classrooms, for 360 and 180 minutes respectively. Their instruction will be on Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays. In Grades 4 and 5, our 1 Ell at the entering stage and 3 at the emerging stage will be given equal time in the standalone and integrated programs, receiving 360 minutes of E.N.L. instruction, on Mondays, Tuesdays and Fridays; and, our1 Ell at the expanding level, 180 minutes of content area instruction from the classroom teacher and the E.N.L. teacher using the integrated method of instruction. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The core content is delivered in English, all classes at C.S.112 incorporate the CCLS, setting high goals and expectations for all ELLs. The S.I.O.P. (Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol) model, providing the means through which instruction is planned and implemented to ensure student engagement, teacher monitoring and on-going assessments, will be utilized. All components of the S.I.O.P. will include speaking, listening, reading and writing. Language and content objectives, while scaffolding for understanding are used to capture academic language and are used in every subject and/or content area Each English Language Learner receiving E.N.L. instruction will begin by meeting the minimum requirements. This includes for grades K-5, listening and speaking on a daily basis, reading a minimum of 25 books across all content areas and standards, as well as students writing on a daily basis across all content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Upon admission to CS 112, students and their families are required to complete a home language survey/questionnaire to determine the child's home language and the extent to which that language is used in the home. Once completed, the family is interviewed to help the Ell teacher better plan how to most effectively assist the child in language acquisition. The determination of need for the child continues as the child receives assessment exams designed to determine the child's ability to read and comprehend the language. These assessments are given by both the subject teacher and the Ell instructor. To be assured of the appropriate evaluations of our Ells in English and/or Spanish, including of course, our students with disabilities, we use periodic assessments; we use Scantron to access students’ reading, scaled reading standard error, reading percentile, NCE, SIP, vocabulary, fiction, long passage, lexile, scores, etc.; as well as Mathematics scaled scores, percentile, number and operations, geometry and so on; as well as Language Arts score. MYON, the technologically-based reading program which provides multilingual/multi-subject resources and assessments, also assists in the intervention process for the LEP students with disabilities. Individual assessment report rosters and Successmaker, give a performance report, as they identify instructional areas in need, as well. As the year progresses, the student is re-evaluated at pre-determined intervals to assess progress and create relevant action plans based of the data obtained from those assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is differentiated for each of the following ELL subgroups thus: a. SIFE: Initial SIFE status must be indicated in the DOE's data collection systems (BNDC), no later than 30 days from initial enrollment. As per CR Part 154, schools have up to one year to make a final determination of SIFE status; therefore, initial SIFE identification within the 30 days, may be modified for up to one year. SIFE status is removed once the Ell scores at intermediate/transitioning level or higher on the NYSESLAT. Currently, C.S.112 does not have any SIFE students. However, when we do have, according to the results of literacy evaluations here and based on the NYSED rules regarding SIFE students. According to the NYSED, the majority of our SIFE arrive at our schools with low or no literacy skills in any language. Some are behind in content knowledge for their age and pose great challenges for educators. They also may have complex social and psychological needs due to traumatic migration experiences, frustrations with their academic delays in relation to their peers, a lack of familiarity with school culture, and isolation in school. Many of these students, with their complex needs, often do not to get the support they require in school and make little or no progress. Some may eventually drop out of school. Through the NYSED our school offers a SIFE Oral Interview Questionnaire and Guidance, the Multilingual Literacy SIFE Screener (MLS) assessment portal (link is external)and guidance, a Writing Screener, a Frequently Asked Questions document, and a SIFE Identification flow chart Robust Vocabulary Instruction and our Decodable Practice Readers, in addition to our Continental Finish Line E.N.L. series will be used as well. b. Newcomer: Out of 20 Ells, 19 are in the category of Newcomer Ells, 0-3 years. For our 'Newcomers', instruction will include for the most part, intensive listening and speaking practice, leading to appropriately leveled reading and writing. Our varied multilingual library offers bilingual readings on cassettes and CDs, with our take-home backpacks, which include either a tape recorder with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84  headset, or a CD player/walkman (depending on the electronic device needed by the student). The Cornerstone Newcomer Worktext is excellent for this group. Moreover, apart from our grade level materials here, we will be using Continental's Finish Line texts and CDs which is very well geared towards preparation for the NYSESLAT exams, giving not only detailed practice in all modalities of English with lessons geared towards the CCLS, but also, a thorough evaluation of their progress or lack thereof, which will assist the teachers in further planning and instruction. Lots of role play, music/ songs, poetry, rhymes and riddles, nursery rhymes, with phonics activities and games; using the smart board and our websites and instructional DVDs will assist our newcomers according to their individual needs. c. Developing: Our only student with 4 years of E.S.L. instruction was in a bilingual school prior to coming to us earlier this year. She will continue, in Grade 5 to get Math in Spanish and English, using GoMath! textbooks in both languages, with support from the Math glossaries here at C.S.112. She will need a lot of academic vocabulary incorporating the S.I.O.P. methods. Her reading and writing skills need a lot of focus, so the Lucy Calkins Writing Program, formally adopted here at C.S.112, will encourage improvement in these vital areas where she is lacking. d. Long Term: (C.S.112 does not have any long term ELLs at this time). e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting Ell status: At C.S.112, we have 4 students who exited the program: 2 in Grade 2, who exited in 2014; and 2 in Grade 4, who exited in 2014 as well. Reading and Writing practice as well as Math foundations in their classrooms with the classroom teacher and the E.S.L. teacher working collaboratively, will assist tremendously in the transitional stage that these former Ells are now in. The Ready Gen and GoMath! curriculum texts will be used and any multilingual devices, if deemed necessary. Long term ELLs are tested have work differentiated for them based on the need for the child observed primarily by the subject teacher. Our long term Ells have demonstrated an ability to read and comprehend the language with only marginal difficulty, difficulty that can usually be addressed through the scaffolding of materials or differentiation which is determined in collaboration with the Ell instructor. Should the difficulty occur because of a language issue, the Ell teacher will play a more informed role of developing a plan for differentiation based on past performance and the developmental familiarity the Ell teacher has of the student.. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies and grade-level materials used by teachers of ELL-SWDs, include the Lucy Calkins Writing Program, Ready Gen, GoMath! , 'Soar to Success' program, the 'Instant Learning Center' program, 'High Frequency Word Book' by Benchmark and the 'Into English' programs all provide opportunities for content area instruction on grade level, with different methodologies and techniques pertinent to the individual needs of our special ones. Ells identified at C.S.112 as having special needs, are given services as mandated on their IEPs as well as offerings of extra-curricular activities and E.N.L. extended day programs. C.S.112 will continue to adhere to the recommendations of the IEP and offer differentiated instruction for our special education LEP population. The E.N.L, Fordham/CBO mentors give 45 minutes of instruction to the 1 full-time Special Ed./Ell for 4 days during the school day. We utilize additional resources including technology – smart board and computers and audiovisual equipment. Also offered are Saturday parent-child academics for ELA and Math. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? C.S.112 uses curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs, within the least restrictive environment, as it is important that while there are only a limited number of teaching periods in the typical school day, teachers adjust their schedules accordingly to suit the mandates of our Ells according to their IEPs. If the speech therapist has an ELL at a particular time slotted for the SETSS teacher, the 2 work as a team with the classroom teacher to accommodate the student. The reading, writing guidelines, monthly schoolwide readers and monthly word study guidelines, with perhaps homophones being done this week and synonyms the next, are all flexible and used as guidelines to ensure uniformity among all classes and all grade levels. The discretionary judgment of; and, careful evaluation by all pedagogues involved in the education of our special ELLs continue is paramount in ensuring the above. New to Ell-SWDs is the allowable changes in testing accommodations which permits the reading of content and not just questions and answers, in the NYS Reading and NYSESLAT exams. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  In continuation for the 2017-2018 school year, C.S.112 will once again be in full partnership with Fordham University, our current CBO (Community Based Organization). They are based in-house with a full staff, including some teachers from the C.S.112 staff, who assist in the ELT (Extended Learning Time), Monday to Friday for an hour after school. They will assist the school with all targeted interventions planned for our population, with a strong focus on our Ells and/or SWDs. They will work with the entire staff regarding instruction in all content areas in English, attendance, language development and in whatever other areas deemed necessary. They will be in attendance at all PLCs (Professional Learning Communities); and work in planning and instruction, as all teachers collaborate within teacher teams to complete a minimum of two inquiry team cycles aligned to one of the school's Danielson Framework focus components (1e-Designing Coherent Instruction, 3b-Effective Questioning and Discussion, 3c- Engaging Students, 3d-Assessment). The academics for Ells will focus on Common Core, the Writing Process, Reading and Math, Vocabulary Development and Fluency, Phonics, Comprehension Skills. The CBO team will meet with small groups of students in their mentoring program at least 3-5 times a week, after thorough analysis of the appropriate data. In addition, other targeted intervention programs for Ells in ELA, Math, Science and Social Studies, done in English, include R.T.I. (Response to Intervention) for all Ells K - 5. We also have Fletcher's Place for our K -2 Ells, especially for those at the beginning level of English. This program provides a solid foundation in ELA and phonics instruction in real situations which make the students think that they are playing, yet they are learning to read. It offers our Ells a fun, multisensory approach to beginning reading. All K - 5 Ells do iReady, first on the computer and then as a written assessment. They also use Word Study books according to their grade to increase vocabulary and/or language production. The "Building Literacy Through Reader's Theatre" is an excellent intervention program for Ells in Grades 3 to 5, as it is a performance genre - the type of reading material meant to be performed - a natural vehicle for developing reading comprehension. Go Math! programs with textbooks in Spanish for all Spanish-speaking Ells, from Kindergarten to Grade 5, as well as individually packaged kits of geometrical shapes and rulers, are distributed to parents and children for continued learning in Math at home, of what all teachers do here, in Math, with our Ells. Grade 4 Ells enjoy fossweb.com, national geographic.com to help (further) with their Science exam preparation, as it affords them access to technology as well as fun through Science. A.I.S., E.N.L. after-school, Saturday, Winter and Spring academies; and special partnerships such as Ramapo for Children….all provide pertinent targeted intervention for Ells in ELA, Math and other core content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New programs and/or improvements to be considered for the upcoming school year, include LanguageNut, Myon, iReading Reading, and iReading Math for all ELLs. This program offers robust vocabulary instruction through read-alouds. Scholastic's research team reviewed a number of concerns, particularly the gaps in word knowledge and comprehension skills between different groups of children, the quality of vocabulary instruction in elementary schools and the lack of effective read-alouds in primary-grade classrooms. This research provided the motivation for the authors of this program, Beck and McKeown, to create a rich and robust vocabulary program using effective read-alouds as a method to help teachers and students make the most of their interactions when reading books, while promoting children's vocabulary and comprehension development. Moreover, there is the all-rounded National Geographic ELL intervention program, which covers all content areas, offering to our Ells a wide range of educational activities, using colorful texts, posters, leveled books, diagnostic material; and, web access and constant technological support. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? CS 112 never had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded access to all school programs at all times: Any and all after-school programs, including, of course any E.N.L. ones, whether they may be a language-enriched one, or just exam preparation, for a specific exam and/or for a specific ELL subgroup - all these are offered to ELLs, how to study skills, reading and/or exam preparation, in some cases due to the lack of English proficiency on the part of most of their parents. When ELLs are identified at C.S.112, a list of their names is given to the administration, the S.B.S.T. team, the IEP teacher and all other members of staff responsible for instruction and/or administration; and the parent coordinator, who works alongside the E.N.L. teacher. Everyone helps in the identification of appropriate programs for the ELLs. Parents are also interviewed and spoken with individually by the parent coordinator at our 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  E.N.L. parent orientation meeting and given informational packets, which are filled out for them if necessary, to ensure representation of ELLs in all programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials, including technology, used to support Ells include, but are not limited to: Finish Line: New York Ells, Bilingual Common Core, K - 5; iReady, Benchmark Education High Frequency Books, Into English!, Words Their Way, Poetry Power E.S.L, E.S.L. Holiday Activity Kit, On Our Way To English, Getting Ready For The NYSESLAT, Time For Kids, smarttech.com (materials, lessons and guidelines), Ready Gen, GoMath, Lucy Calkins' Units of Study For Teaching Writing; and, National Geographic's 'Reach' - Language, Literacy, Content - Comprehensive Scope and Sequence Interactive program (using myNGconnect.com). The smartboard…..an integral part of our learning …all classrooms are equipped with a smart board, computers, printers, with digital projectors in some. The MyOn program and LanguageNut.com programs are crucial to the E.N.L. program here and are enjoyed by our Ells for a few years now. At C.S.112, through daily reinforcements and collaboration through constant articulation among staff members, all teachers are quite aware that they are teachers of Ells…teachers of children with English as their second language, with greater challenges and diverse needs. Professional development on an ongoing basis throughout the entire year lends to the belief of cooperative learning among staff and collaboration while knowledge and our individual strengths are pooled in the effective instructional programs offered at our school. It is said that if the child's language and culture are seen as part of the curriculum, then the child will feel comfortable and ease on into learning. With that in mind, the E.N.L. program at C.S.112 has the widest range of multicultural materials in the school. From instructional materials to posters with songs and poems around authentic pictures of Latin American sceneries (for example); to bag filled with musical instruments like the 'maracas' and the 'guido'; to flags from all around the world; to a gigantic stand filled with Phonics Song Charts and a cover of 'un tambor', to bilingual color charts, calendars, ectcetera; to pictures of children from all over the world and floor puzzles to match to something as simple as a grand 'sombrero' in the room for role play, dancing, or…whatever! All of the above and others, along with our Spanish club for the upper grades in which only Spanish is allowed (not English!) facilitate native language support at all times. In our Spanish club, students learn poems and songs in Spanish from different countries, which they analyze in detail. They make up multilingual signs and labels in English and Spanish for the E.N.L. room and for around the school. In December of every year, the Spanish club makes the school's gigantic 'pinata' and takes it around the entire school, from Pre-K to Grade 5, to teach each class a little about the history of the pinata, and, to invite a representative from each class (a non-Hispanic child) to represent the class at the school's biggest party ever. A sense of pride is felt when they are able to share their culture and/or native (language) experiences with the rest of the school, in this regard. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The home language is used by our multilingual E.S.L. teacher to scaffold instruction for our Ells. If the students are reading, oftentimes, the multicultural books include characters with Spanish names which give students (who are presently at C.S.112 Spanish speakers), so as to afford them more insight into the content being taught. For example, in the content area of Science taught in E.N.L., the student may be presented with the story of “Hormiguita, The Little Ant”. The name “Hormiguita” itself, means “Little Ant” and so, the student already from the get go, has a hint as to what the story is going to be about. The different parts of the ant as representative of the insect family and labeled diagrams of the colonies, done bilingually may provide the native language support needed for comprehension. When cognates are possible, they are noted for added comprehension of instruction. When lessons include cultures represented in class, and visitors from said cultures are present, it reinforces the importance of the students’ native language in the class. As an adjunct to support for the home language, bilingual glossaries and dictionaries are provided for our students. There is also the scaffolding of materials in class to assist students in understanding the work gradually. This allows for the student to process the work and have it explained in sequential fashion. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. It is imperative here, that required services support, and resources correspond, to ELLs' ages and grade levels. Any support services bought into or housed in the schools have to be in line with the curriculum and be age and grade appropriate. For example, Fletcher's Place, used in the early childhood grades shows children learning the basics of reading through a multisensory phonics approach, pertinent to their ages and grade levels. Our Reader's Theatre program is one of the best and most authentic ways to engage our Grades 3-5 students enthusiastically in repeated reading to build reading fluency and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  improve overall reading performance. The CDs have true stories, listing components of the program and making them attend to improving active listening skills. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Collocation is not applicable to C.S112 at this time. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Activities to assist newly-enrolled Ell students before the beginning of the school year, are done mainly in collaboration with community based organizations and groups - at the Community Centers and in other programs in the neighborhood, for example. Students get to know the neighborhood and the city in which they now reside and capitalize on the knowledge of buddies that they meet to become acclimatized. At CS 112, we also recognize the importance of celebrating different cultures as means of helping our students embrace who they are and who they are becoming. Each culture is celebrated throughout the year, with lessons and festivities planned to commemorate a specific day or event significant to the student and their families. There is also ongoing and active acknowledgement of customs and ceremonies honoring the traditions of the children here, These celebratory activities are organized by our Parent Coordinator in association with the Ell instructor,our CBO, and our classroom teachers. Bulletin boards, hallway displays during the holidays, and festive attire to highlight special occasions all positively address the cultures and need for celebrating diversity at our school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? If possible, C.S.112 will offer Spanish to its Ells as a language elective. The Spanish Club continues to be operational here however, should finances dictate otherwise. In our Spanish Club meetings, English is not 'allowed', only Spanish is spoken and is reinforced by our "Presidente del Club de Espanol." 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? C.S.112 does not have a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The sole E.N.L. teacher at C.S.112, is (TESOL) licensed, certified and tenured. Professional activities are organized at the school, regional, borough and city levels. In collaboration with our network, we offer every month, professional development workshops to assist ALL teachers of ELLs and second languages, as well as administration and support staff. Every week as well, the staff meets for PLCs and for additional professional development with the assistant principal and principal, who offer ongoing professional development on a varied number of topics, along with the 3 teacher leaders, CBO inquiry and other staff. Topics are usually curriculum-based and incorporate all state/common core standards. Topics include, but are not limited to: * The GO TO Strategies: Scaffolding Options for Teachers of English Language Learners, K -12 * Scaffolds: Building Path for Educational Success * Common Core Learning Standards aligned with New Language Arts Progression and Targets of Measurements * Implementation of the New CR Part 154: Preparing to Serve Ells and their Families 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  * Components of an Integrated ENL Program: Co-Planning, Co-Teaching, Co-Assessing and Co-Reflecting for ELLs * Response to Intervention for English Language Learners * Designing and Developing Exemplary Practices for ELLs * RtI for students at Risk * Focused Reading Instruction with Text based Conversations and Benchmark Vocabulary * How to Revolutionize Vocabulary Learning and Instruction for English Language Learners in Grades 4 -12 * The Translation and Interpretation Unit and its Services;" "The Language Access Coordinator and the Roles of the L.A.C * The Language Allocation Policy and the RSCEP (Renewal School's Comprehensive Education Plan) * Data Wise * MyOn * Changes in Allowable Testing Accommodations Ells with IEPs. * The Ell Reference Guide * Formative Assessment that Truly Informs Instruction: Clarifying and Sharing Learning Intentions and Criteria for Success; Engineering Effective Classroom Discussions, Questions and Learning Tasks that Elicit Evidence of Learning; Providing Feedback that Moves Learners Forward; Activating Students as Owners of Their Own Learning; Activating Students as Instructional Resources for One Another; Reflecting on Current Assessment Practices and How To Strengthen Them in the Integrated ENL Classroom. Non-Pedagogical staff are required to attend all professional development offerings, as all classroom personnel are considered a part of the instructional design at the school. Proof that PD's are attended are maintained by attendance being taken as well as teacher/staff reflection forms completed at the end of the PD. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. As per the Ell Policy and Reference Guide, in which is included the new CR Part 154, New York State mandates that every general education teacher is to get 15% total hours (6 hours) and the E.N.L. teacher, 50% total hours (18 hours) of ELL-specific professional development. We offer ENL professional development opportunities for all teachers and ENL teachers during our monthly professional development sessions and our ENL teacher attends ENL workshops sponsored by the FSC and Fordham RBERN (Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network at Fordham University). Along with the agenda, a strict record of attendance at all workshops as well as files, are kept to ensure that the minimum requirements are met. As stated in the State Education Department's "Blueprint for English Language Learners' Success:" "For too long our system has not been meeting the needs of ELLs. As the state transitions to the Common Core it is even more critical that we lay a strong foundation for these students;" "It's imperative that ELLs get the support they need to succeed academically." The Blueprint (a copy which has been given to all members of staff at C.S.112), includes guidance on ensuring the academic and social needs of ELLs are addressed by educators and school leaders; engaging ELLs in Common Core instruction; involving parents and families of ELLs in the education of their children; supporting bilingual and English as a Second Language (ESL/ENL) teachers; leveraging ELLs' home languages and cultural assets; and monitoring ELLs' content knowledge and new and home language development to inform instruction. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The new Chancellor has increased the meetings and contact times with our parents and has mandated that we have 2 more annual formal Parent/Teacher conference dates; and, every Tuesday afternoon, we meet individually and/or call parents to discuss goals of our program and the school's goals. Our Ell parents have the E.N.L. teacher, fluent in Spanish, a parent coordinator with a solid working knowledge of Spanish and other staff members, literate in the language as well to assist in interpretation and translation needs. The E.N.L teacher is also the school's L.A.C. (Language Access Coordinator) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  and distributes annually, a list of typical teacher messages to parents, in Spanish and French, so that they can have right there on their desks, a point of reference for messages, such as "Please come and see me on ________at (time); " "We have a trip on…;" "Thank you for…" and so on… Parents of Ells are provided with annual individual meetings throughout the year, outside of the mandated parent orientation and other scheduled parent-teacher conferences. Parents are invited in to discuss the program offered here and how the results of their children's language proficiency assessments impact on their academic achievements in all content areas. This year, C.S.112 implemented Class Dojo, as a new way to improve parent-teacher communication. All members of staff created Class Dojo accounts and had parents sign up. Whenever there is a meeting, a trip, the need to share pictures of what is happening in the class, the communication is placed on Class Dojo. Telephone calls, flyers, bilingual letters are also sent home. Parents are assisted with any language communication hindrances, as interpretation is provided by the ENL teacher, who is also the LAC (Language Access Coordinator). Whenever necessary, she also provides the pertinent documents translated in the language of the parent. 98% of Ell parents at C.S.112 speak Spanish, 1 speaks French and English and 1 speaks Bengali and English. A log is kept of all meetings; and for those unable to physically be here, another time slot is set up or a phone conference is set up. Ongoing parent communication is encouraged for the partnership in our children's education to be enhanced on a daily basis. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent involvement with our ELLs’ parents is year-round and includes orientation sessions, monthly club meetings, workshops, and Family Literacy night. At all of these meetings, we DO discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. Provisions for interpretation and translation are available from the moment they sign in at the bilingual School Safety Agent’s desk, to the office, or the Parent Coordinator’s office… all are areas where they see signs made visible that translation and interpretation services are readily available in their language, for all pertinent interactions at the school level. Cook Shop, teaching parents and their children how to create healthy meals for a balanced diet, with ingredients provided by the Food Bank for monthly workshops which encourage our Ell parents to come into the school. Sneakers and coats are provided through Operation Warm and Shoes That Fit (Nordstrom and New Balance)other community-based partnerships. Community resources: • Edenwald Library – Provides multiple workshops daily on-site and off-site for students as well as parents. The NYPL has partnered with ReelAbilities which is a film festival based on people with disabilities. It has expanded to include a beauty contest for Ells and students with disabilities, book readings about children with disabilities, movie viewings and more. https://www.nypl.org/about/locations/edenwald • Project BOOST- offers students’ educational and artistic enrichment experiences; test prep services, academic leadership, and community service opportunities. BOOST serves low-income students from diverse communities participate in activities and attend events that advance students minds. http://www.the-cei.org/what-we-do/enrichment-programming/project-boost/ • Urban Advantage –a standards-based program that’s intended to develop students’ understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between public school systems and science cultural institutions like zoos, botanical gardens, museums, and science centers. https://www.urbanadvantagenyc.org/m • YAI- works with Ell students, adults, families’ government, corporate partners, donors and foundations to ensure that people with disabilities are recognized for their abilities, accomplishing goals that are significant to them, and unified in their community. https://www.yai.org/ • Boys Town - Boys Town offers an immense library of parenting material and articles developed over many decades by our child behavior experts. A 6-week workshop is provided in schools to help parents with strategies to manage with in-home and at-school behaviors displayed by their children. http://www.boystown.org/locations/new-york/Pages/default.aspx 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  • Operation Warm- Provides brand new coats for schools and helps to increase peer acceptance both inside and outside of school. https://www.operationwarm.org/our-impact/ • Shoes That Fit- Helps children and parents in schools throughout America.They help children improve their self-esteem and participation in school by eliminating one of poverty’s most visible and debilitating marks. https://www.shoesthatfit.org/ • Community Education Councils (CEC)- Community Education Councils (CECs) are education policy advisory bodies responsible for, among other things, reviewing and evaluating the district’s educational programs, approving zoning lines, and holding public hearings on certain matters. Each CEC consists of 12 members, who serve as volunteers and provide hands-on leadership and support for their district's public schools http://nycparentleaders.org/community-education-councils.html • Montefiore – Montefiore provides workshops on-site and off-site to provide information about medical issues that affects the community. http://www.montefiore.org/workshops • Bronx Museum – provides off and on site events for families and students to teach them about art and the cultures they are retrieved from. http://www.bronxmuseum.org School and District-based Resources: • Fordham University- (C.S. 112’s CBO) supports the entire staff with all aspects of education to promote rigor in implementing the Common Core Learning Standards. Works on improving students' attendance through the use of incentives; provides an extending learning time and programs and services that cater to the needs of the students. Their focus on our parents is year-round and with all of the school's community and district partnerships herein. • Smile New York – A mobile dentist facility that provides care on- site to students through their insurance policies. Whether or not their parents have insurance for them they are still provided with care. Students that are signed-up will receive exams as well as service care (fillings, cleanings, etc.). When parents let us know that their children need advanced care, they are referred accordingly. • AmeriCorps Program – Moves communities forward by working one-on-one to develop skills and academic leadership. Students participate in service projects that meet critical community needs in education, public safety, health, and the environment. • Astor Mental Health Clinic- Clinic available at C.S. 112 Monday-Friday and is available for students that may suffer from behavioral or mental issues. Students receive a behavioral health screening bi-annually. Family counseling and therapy is fundamental to the success of this program, now in its second year here. • Owen Peters Family Eyecare – Annually provides vision exams for students and provides free eyeglasses for those that require it. • The Office of School Health Asthma Clinic –As of the 2016-2017 school year, an Asthma Clinic is available at C.S. 112 Monday-Friday, with on-site staff now permanently based here.. The Department of Education and the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene have built a partnership that promotes the health of children. These services include case management of chronic health problems, preventive health screening, urgent care, medication administration, preventive counseling, reproductive health services, health education referral for care and assurance of ongoing effective treatment….all done with the parents and with their written consent. • Inside Broadway – teaches students the basic building blocks of musical theatre. They learn teamwork strategies, take vocal and dance lessons from professionals and put on a performance for their fellow students, staff, and families. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  • Ramapo for Children- Ramapo provides coaching and training sessions for educators, parents, and youth-service workers. They provide on-site, interactive programming that can be simply and instantly applied. It provides a summer program organized to help children with exceptionalities learn teamwork, gain friendships and fun experiences. • Young Kings and Queens Chess Club- To provide in-city youth on-site with skills that will promote student achievement in all academic areas; increase students' level of thinking; encourage problem-solving skills and strategies; aid social interaction; and, motivate students. • Footprintz Elite Basketball Program – is a unique development program whose ultimate goal is to mentor students while using sports as a vehicle to teach student/ athlete life skills, sportsmanship, teamwork, leadership, and discipline. Parents in the auditorium helping to coordinate the Math Competition among the upper grades, while supporting their children on stage representing their grades; or, even just coming in to serve ice cream, during the annual Kick-Off to Summer ENL Ice-Cream Party….any and all of these make parents fell welcome. They know that it's not only when we have formal Parent/Teacher conferences, nor when something is wrong with their children…they know that there is an open-door policy and our Ell parents are always welcome. Newcomer parents are especially 'spoiled' by getting prepared homework kits for their children, the opportunity to borrow CD players and books on CDs and individual demonstrations of MyOn and other programs used here. Whenever deemed necessary, the ENL teacher, upon consultation with the parent, also meets with staff of neighboring community centers who escort our children from the buildings after school and are in charge of them until working parents are able to pick them up. With the community center, we show staff members what is being done with particular Ells in the classes, what their needs are, whether or not the parents are able to assist and how best they can help our Ells when they leave school in the afternoons, before they go home. Many parents of our Ells would like to better help with homework. However, if even after the school tries in this regard and the parent admits to either illiteracy, language barrier or any other kind of deficit, then we consult, plan, assist, reflect and team up with the necessary personnel, in order to enable more involvement on their side. Whenever there is articulation with our parents, logs are kept by all members of staff. On the back of the blue emergency cards for each student, the date, time and purpose of each call is logged. When we have our face-to-face meetings on a Tuesday afternoon, or at any other time; if letters or notes are sent home; if trip notices are sent…for whatever outreach that is done to ensure parent needs are accommodated, logs and sign-in sheets are filled out and kept in a binder by all members of staff as well. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. *STARS Classroom is a web-based system that automates the collection of course marks from teachers. Teachers can view class rosters, access student data and enter course marks which appear automatically on student report cards. The system is continually enhanced and improved upon, based on educators' feedback. It is updated on the DOE system to align with Common Core demands. Every E has to be accounted for in STARS, whether s(he) has been admitted or discharged, tested in or out of the program. Updates are made accordingly and when teachers write in their assessments in the various subject and/or competencies, with the marks included for the particular marking period, on assigned dates, the site, which is secure, may be viewed by all educators and compared and contrasted for each area of learning whether individually or part of a whole group situation. *Book Trust began its first year with us in the 2016-2017 school year, in partnership with Scholastic. Book Trust. It provided all Ells the opportunity to get $7 worth of books, including bilingual ones/books of their choice, EVERY month. Book Trust was so successful in its first year here, that the school was featured on News 12 in the Bronx. Due to its success, we are happy to state that, for the 2017-2018 school year, Book Trust and Scholastic will once again be in partnership with our school community in an effort to increase reading skills and the love of reading among our children. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  2018-19 RSCEP-R 93 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Susan Barnes, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Bronxwood School School DBN: 11X112 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Susan Barnes Title Principal Laurel Isidore Assistant Principal Ayoka Singleton Parent Coordinator Sharon Burton ENL/Bilingual Teacher Anastasia Guadalupe Parent Latoya Walker/Technology Teacher/Subject Area Fosua Apprey/ Psychologist Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Zestey Ouk School Counselor Meisha Porter Nancy Saffer Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Senior Director Lou Ramunni Other CBO Director N/A N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 6/27/17 N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 95 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: The Bronxwood School Superintendent: Meisha Porter DBN: 11X112 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No ENL TEACHER/LANGUAGE ACCESS COORDINATOR YES YES Sharon Burton * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As soon as a parent with a language other than English enter the school, they immediately see a Welcome poster with the 9 major languages in the schools and stickers in the various languages for them to indicate to us the appropriate language spoken, even to our School Safety Agent, so that immediate assistance may be provided. When students are registered, their parents' home language is immediately recorded in the system. When meetings, including IEP/psychological evaluations are to be held, the school immediately addresses the need and provides the necessary assistance. If personnel is not on site, we consult the list of resources given to the school by the Department of Education through its Translation and Interpretation unit and take the steps necessary to ensure clarity in communication. In every day occurrences in the school, documents are translated in the language 2018-19 RSCEP-R 96  of the parents and given out at the same time as the English copies, so that they may know what is happening in the school/ with their children. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral At C.S.112, the parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication are English and Spanish, as written and signed by them, in the registration packets received upon enrolling their children here.In fact, even though we have a 48.8% of Hispanic students registered, interestingly, only about 25-30% of them ask for information in Spanish. In spite of their preferences, however, important information is usually disseminated in English and Spanish. BENGALI EWE French Fulani Mossi (AKA MORE) English Spanish 4 1 1 2 1 331 54 0.53% 0.13% 0.13 0.26% 0.13% 88.23% 10.58% 4 1 1 2 1 331 54 0.53% 0.13% 0.13% 0.26% 0.13% 88.23% 10.58% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. From the list above, of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, there are no languages that represent at least a 10% or more of the population of C.S.112 (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 2018-19 RSCEP-R 97  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. C.S.112 typically disseminates the following documents that require translation and they are distributed to families on pertinent dates and/or pertinent times: Annual D.O.E. handbooks, in particular "Achieve NYC, A Complete Guide to New York City Public Schools; PK-12" (always come in English and Spanish) and are distributed as soon as a new child/parent comes into the school. (They are also always available to parents just outside the parent coordinator's office, at the entrance to the school). Bilingual newsletters and flyers are ongoing and on an as-needed basis. Monthly letters and calendars outlining school events, holidays, deadlines, workshops, meetings, trips, etcetera, in English and Spanish, are written and sent home by the principal. Bilingual report cards, available in STARS, are sent home 3 times a year: once in the fall, once in Spring and once at the end of the school year. However, monthly progress monitoring reports and portfolios are also sent for the parents' perusal. New York State testing calendar and the Department of Education's calendar are given at the beginning of the year and periodically throughout the year up to the spring, to remind parents to make family plans accordingly. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 98  After-school programs and enrichment or mentoring programs and other activities offered by the school including workshops and meetings are additional documents that require translation and are distributed to families at C.S.112. In addition and of extreme importance to teachers, is a list of typical 'teacher messages' that teachers use as a point of reference to write a note or send home a document or a flyer to a parent. These 'messages' are in Spanish and French and include information such as: "We have a trip on…" "Please come in to discuss your child's work", "Thank you for…" and so on… 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? The formal face-to-face meetings that C.S.112 will typically have with parents throughout the school year, include curriculum nights/parent-teacher meet and greet, occurring on September 17, 2015. Moreover, we have parent-teacher conferences which will take place in November and March. There are informal interactions as teachers call parents weekly and/or on an as-needed basis; and, the attendance teacher, social worker, family worker, parent coordinator and 2 guidance counselors make calls to parents on an as-needed basis as well, with house visits done if deemed necessary. Monthly meetings held on the second Wednesday of the month. Tuesday family talk time. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 99  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) C.S.112 provides a list of all translation and interpretation services offered through the Department of Education, when it notifies parents of their right to be provided with information, whether in the oral or written form, in the school. For parents of Ells, at the parent orientation meeting, the Chancellor's video and all notifications and parent survey forms, including second language program selection forms, MUST be given in the pertinent language(s) of our parents. In the packet given to our Language Access Coordinator by the D.O.E.'s Translation and Interpretation Unit, there are all of the above notifications available to the community. A large multilingual welcome poster, the Parents' Bill of Rights, Parents' Guide to Language Access and the Language ID Guide are at the main entrance, in the main office and the room of the multilingual Language Access Coordinator. All are pertinent documents are disseminated to parents in their languages. They know from registration, that if translation is needed for documents or interpretation is needed for meetings with staff members or anyone in the school community, that we will provide such service. If by chance, (and this has not been the case here in years)…if a parent speaks a language that is not understood by anyone else at C.S.112, then by all means, the Translation and Interpretation Unit will be contacted. If they do not have someone available to assist, then we will enlist the services of one of the companies approved by the Department of Education to assist that parent. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will continue at C.S.112 to send home parent surveys, telephone monitoring calls, and checklists at our face-to-face meetings, to verify that the quality and availability of our services are of the highest standards. E-mail systems put in place and text messaging services give us immediate and important feedback from parents as well, on the quality and availability of services here. The parent association's executive team, the parent coordinator, the language access coordinator and administration will carefully monitor this. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 100 
