 11X127 School Name: J.H.S. 127 THE CASTLE HILL Principal: HARRY SHERMAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Castle Hill Middle School 11X127 School Number (DBN): 11x127 6-8 1560 Purdy Street, Bronx, NY 10462 718-892-8600 Phone Number: 718-892-8300 Fax: Harry Sherman hsherma@schoools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Harry Sherman Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Courtney Waggenspack Diana Neverson Courtney Waggenspack Abel Ortiz NA NA Vivian Jimenez District Information Geographical District: 11 Jeremy Kabinoff Superintendent: 2750 Throop Avenue, Bronx, NY 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: jkabino@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2629 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Harry Sherman Courtney Waggenspack Diana Neverson Maria Rivera Abel Ortiz NA NA Vivian Jimenez Abdul Hafiz MeleynieDelgado Bryant Jackson Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ CSA   Abel Ortiz Sandra Sostre Valerie Torres Sharon Hill Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of Castle Hill Middle School 127 is: Section 4: CEP Overview 1. to commit to the success of all students 2. to develop lifelong learners who are co-creators of their education 3. to cultivate within our school an environment where students, teachers, guardians, and all stakeholders work together to ensure that all students are prepared for college and career success   Our school community is one where students, teachers, guardians, and all other participants have a shared voice and a shared responsibility in ensuring our success. We will hold all of our students to the highest standards of academic performance and citizenry, and treat them with the highest regard and respect they deserve. Every member of the school community, both student and adult, is called upon to display the characteristics of a learner, always willing to pursue a better way to do things, learn from each other, and challenge their own assumptions about the world and how it works. We believe that the student is at the center of all learning, and must embrace and pursue their own education as not just a participant, but also the co-creator of their learning experiences. It is the responsibility of the teachers and staff to create these opportunities for learning experiences while understanding and planning for the unique learning needs and styles of their students. It is the responsibility of the students to share in the ownership of their education and their future. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Castle Hill Middle School is a moderately large middle school with an enrollment of about 850 in the Parkchester section of the Bronx. We are a long standing school, established in 1941. We are unique in that as a non-specialized community school we support the whole child in all aspects: rigorous academics, vibrant arts, competitive and robust sports programs, and culturally responsive education focused on academic ownership, engagement and civic agency. We are a strong collaborative learning community committed to supporting the development of critical thinkers in a deeply nurturing and developmentally supportive environment. We are also host to an integrated district gifted and talented program, we are committed to fully inclusive and flexible special education support, and we are home to high quality bilingual and ENL education, including the only Bengali Bilingual program in the district. We maintain strong partnerships in the Arts with Theater for a New Audience, Broadway Junior, and Musica De Camara. We maintain a strong CBO relationship with the New York Edge, which coordinates our vibrant after school and extended learning programs. We are especially proud of our participation in the exclusive Young Ambassadors program of the (UN) United Nations, and our Peer Group Connect student to student mentoring program. We are proud to be a Showcase School for Culturally Responsive Education this year, modeling how teachers and students develop equity through access and agency, as well as rigorous and culturally responsive curriculum. Our strength as a learning community is our innovative and collaborative Professional Learning framework, displayed in the development of Common Core Aligned Instructional Units, Assessments, and monitoring strategies, and implementation of progressive and student centered practices based on the Common Core Instructional Shifts and Danielson’s Framework for Teaching. We are also proud of our strength in creating a supportive and nurturing environment through a comprehensive and responsive student support program, including PBIS (Positive Behavior Intervention Supports) , mentoring, advisory, peer mediation, Student Government, service learning, and peer mentoring. Our creative special education programming is a strength as well, with parallel programming allowing all students to be in an inclusive, ICT (Integrated Co-Teaching) environment for homeroom and at least some core subjects, and access to focused small class instruction where appropriate. Finally, we support high expectations for all students, offering extensive preparation support for the Specialized High School Admissions Test, facilitating administration of the test at the school, and offering Regents Earth Science, Living Environment, and Algebra. Over 25% of our 8th grade students take the Regents Algebra exam every year. As with our focus on student centered instructional practices, we are proud to partner with the Teacher Leadership Program to implement the practice of engaging teacher leaders in shared ownership of the instructional program. In addition to our three Peer Instructional Coaches and a Demonstration Teacher, we have a pipeline of teacher leaders who model and facilitate innovative and supportive practice, creative and rigorous unit planning, responsive AIS (Academic Intervention Services) programs and coherent, sophisticated assessment practices. In particular our ENL (English as New Language) department has gone from an area of improvement to an area of strength in terms of leveraging strong practice for the growth of the learning community (in fact, our Transitional Bilingual Bengali program was identified as a Model Program). 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our Special Education population is consistently about 14-15%. The needs of these students vary greatly based on their Individual Education Plans, but often include the need for targeted instructional interventions, social-emotional supports, and transitional support, as well as a variety of related services including Speech and Hearing, Counseling, OT, and PT. We prioritize meeting these needs in a "mainstream," LRE or inclusive setting as much as possible. We also have a large English as a New Language Population, of approximately 18%. Their needs also vary greatly based on how much formal education they have received, how recently they arrived, home English language support, etc. Their needs often include native language supports, targeted ESL services, and social-emotional support. We prioritize providing required supports and honoring cultural value while also integrating learning with non ENL students as much as possible. We also have a Gifted and Talented population. Their needs also vary greatly based on their prior academic performance and areas of aptitude. Their needs often include opportunities for acceleration and enrichment as well as differentiated intervention supports and social-emotional support. We prioritize providing specialized instructional opportunities while incorporating learning with all students as much as possible. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which we made the most progress are Rigorous Instruction. We saw strong progress on internal assessment data, as well as improvement on the the New York State ELA and Math assessments. We had an increase of 5% proficiency in ELA, to 43% proficient, and an increase of 4% proficiency in Math, to 26% proficient (not including those taking Algebra). In 2017-2018 our Instructional Focus addressed Literacy Strategies for Comprehension (vocabulary and annotation strategies) and Writing (short answer response strategies) in all content areas. We will keep this as our Instructional Focus in 2018-2019, and continue to focus on the support of all populations, particularly ENL students, Students with Disabilities, and students historically experiencing gaps in outcomes, as well as deepen our literacy practices in all content areas by partnering with MSQI. Our Culturally Responsive Education work resulted in students developing a voice to address school improvement, and was highlighted by students visiting Washington DC, as well as visiting the UN. The element where we will continue to focus next year is Strong Family-Community Ties and Supportive Environment. We want to broaden participation in school leadership and continue to expand efforts to increase family engagement through student led feedback, digital and in person communication, and shared ownership of student success through providing better opportunities for families to partner with the school to support their children. We also want to create a more supportive environment by providing teachers and students with strategies and supports to improve student to teacher and student to student relationships. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X127 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 806 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 32 31 10 24 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 28 26 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 77.0% % Attendance Rate 73.4% % Reduced Lunch 17.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.4% 42.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.09 2% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 43.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YSH NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 57 59 94.1% 2.6% 17.7% 21.8% 31.6% 1.7% 8 51% 9.1 25.9% 24% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES YES N/A NO YES NO YES N/A NO NO NO NO N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. From the 2017-2018 Quality Review (1.1): School leaders and teachers have incorporated the integration of rigorous text into the instructional focus, with expectations for evidence in student discussions and writing. Across content areas instructional planning documents cohesively reflect the implementation of strategies for academic and content area vocabulary, written responses, annotations, as well as including learning targets and essential questions that are aligned to the standards. Within grade and subject level teams, teachers use the outcomes from their analysis of NYS assessments, baseline assessments, unit assessments, and performance tasks to make modifications and revisions to the curricula. As a result, all ELA, science, and social studies teachers implement three Common Core-aligned writing units that embed expectations for students to develop claims and counterclaims and to support claims using valid reasoning and relevant evidence. From the 2017-2018 School Perception Survey: 83% of students say that their classes at their school make them think critically. (Q4g) 62% of students say that they are challenged in their classes. (Q5a) 55% of students say that teachers ask difficult questions in class. (Q5c) ● Teachers collaborate on unit planning, pacing, and strategies for data driven instruction aligned to curricular units and assessment ● Writing practices that are strong in ELA are not as strong in content areas. There is an opportunity for teachers to meet in horizontal, cross curricular teams to norm expectations for student work and share curricular and instructional practices. There is also a need for professional development focused on the literacy strategies specific to the content areas, and developing more opportunities for critical thinking. Both of these practices should result in closing the achievement gap more effectively. Part 2 – Annual Goal 3  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of all students will improve at least one level in short answer responses in all content areas based on a Common Core aligned rubric that is student friendly and grade appropriate. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students. September-June Teachers of all subjects and all students. All Students September-June Teachers of all subjects and all students All students. September-June. Teachers of all subjects and all students. Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In conjunction with ongoing professional development and support on developing Common Core-aligned, evidence-based essay-writing and constructing arguments units (including grading these assessments using common rubrics), teachers will vertically by same subject and horizontally across subjects collaboratively develop annotation and short answer response strategies for all students to support reading comprehension and writing in all content areas. All English, science, and social studies teachers will implement three Common Core-aligned writing units that embed expectations for students to develop claims and counterclaims and “to support claims using valid reasoning and relevant and sufficient evidence.” (W.6-8.1) Math teachers will develop units that require students to construct viable arguments for constructed response assessments, as well as critique the reasoning of others through peer assessment. All teachers will teach and reinforce the use of school wide vocabulary and small group instruction strategies, and short answer response strategies in these units. All content area teachers collaborate and plan together at weekly vertical same subject teacher team meetings, and weekly common preps are built into the weekly program for all grade and content area teachers to allow for horizontal, cross subject collaboration. In the common planning, teacher inquiry team, and collaborative planning sessions teachers will: o Develop embedded assessments and rubrics with universal access points aligned to the CCLS priority standard of citing appropriate textual evidence to support claims in all content areas and construct viable arguments in mathematics while critiquing the reasoning of others. o Develop units and lessons aligned with the CCLS using student performance data generated by common assessments o Norm student work and make data transparent, to drive CCLS based instruction, through the development and implementation of individualized student goal setting, progress monitoring and 5  reflection sheets, as well as collection and analysis of data on a school wide tracking spreadsheet that monitors use of evidence as well as implementation of annotation and short answer response strategies o Share best practices, particularly aligned to annotation and short answer response instructional strategies in planning of lessons and units o Adjust teacher practice based on the emerging data through Skedula to address the needs of specific students Teachers will support the needs of specific subgroups, in particular ENL, SWD, Black and Hispanic students, by using small group instruction strategies that provide the opportunity to deepen comprehension. Teachers will use timely data to group flexibly, and collaborate to design high quality scaffolds and extensions that target the needs of students. Teachers will support students through the development of student centered, research and inquiry driven units that revolve around student engagement in “minds-on” critical thinking topics such as the role of adolescents in society and the impact of culture and society on the experiences of adolescents, community awareness and improvement, Science in practice, applied Mathematics. Teachers will be trained in the implementation of technology based research and collaboration, such as the use of Google Classroom and Google Docs in a staff mediated context. Attendance and AIS (Academic Intervention Support) Team will meet 3 out of 4 Weeks to identify students with chronic absenteeism and students for whom basic levels of school support are not sufficient, and develop intervention plans to support improved attendance and successful outcomes in the classroom. SIT (Special Education Intervention Team) will meet twice a month to address quality of instructional support for IEP students, appropriateness of services and supports, and quality of IEPs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Targeted subgroups September-June Teachers of all subjects and all students. All students September-June. Teachers of all subjects and all students. Targeted students September-June, as scheduled AIS teachers, ENL AP, Special Ed AP, IEP teacher, School Aides, grade APs, select teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, 2018, the Parent Coordinator and the Administrative Staff will host an open house for each grade, focusing on the Common Core aligned Rigorous Instruction goals as well as grade specific transitional goals. 6  In November, 2018, students with the support of teachers will host student led family conferences to monitor individual Instructional and Transitional goals. On Tuesday afternoons from September to June, teachers will host parent meetings focused on individual feedback for student instructional and transitional goals. On the third Wednesday of the month on the day of the Parent Association meeting, from September to June, in the morning and afternoon, the Parent Coordinator will host a family forum on current issues and family support with respect to instructional and transitional goals. From September to June, families will receive updates via calendar letter, email, Skedula online communicator, and school messenger, with respect to instructional and transitional goals. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Weekly vertical subject Teacher Team meetings on Mondays to support Professional Development and collaboration on curricular units, inquiry work, assessment development, norming and monitoring. ● Weekly horizontal cross subject common Planning periods. ● After school collaborative planning time using Focus School Set-Aside funds (if available) and Title 1 funds. ● RTI programming targeting students scoring a 1 or 2 on NYS common core assessments. ● Wednesday, Thursday, Friday tutoring and Saturday tutoring targeting students scoring a 1 or 2 on NYS common core assessments and English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities, using Focus School Set-Aside funds (if available) and Title 1 funds. ● Instructional teacher leadership positions: 5 Peer Instructional Coaches, 2 Demonstration Teachers ● Assistant Principals assigned to support of each subject Department, as well as targeted support of Instructional Practice for ENL students and Students With Disabilities ● Skedula data disaggregation tool. ● Data Specialist. ● 2 Additional Chromebook carts for classes of 30 students. ● ENL programming to support Native Language access to rigorous Common Core aligned units and Instructional Strategies through Transitional TBE classes 7  ● SWD programming to support access for students with IEPs to rigorous Common Core aligned units and Instructional Strategies through flexible programming and ICT support ● Assistant Principal focused on ENL Department and Assistant Principal focused on Special Education Department ● AIS Math and ELA teacher ● AIS and SIT Team ● Enrichment ELA and Applied Math programming Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 60% of all students will improve at least one level in short answer responses in all content areas based on a Common Core aligned rubric that is student friendly and grade appropriate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Common Core Aligned, school developed "snapshot" assessment in each content area, disaggregated by the Data Specialist. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? From the 2017-2018 School Perception Survey: 73% of students say that discipline is applied fairly in their school. (Q4h) 91% of students say that they feel safe in their classes. (Q7d) 39% of students say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school. (Q8a) 39% of teachers say that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students. (Q7) 42% of students say that most students at their school treat each other with respect. (Q1d) Our strength is providing a comprehensive menu of services, including PBIS structures, advisory, peer mediation, crisis intervention, mentoring, peer mentoring, student leadership, civic responsibility opportunities and education. Our need is to sustain these efforts, while providing comprehensive training, tools and resources to all staff and students, to improve the quality of relationships that teachers form with students, and students form with each other, to deeply transform the culture in a way that improves the overall learning environment for every student. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 65% of students will agree that students treat each other with respect and that that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school, as measured by the School Perception Survey. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Social Studies teachers will collaborate with the ELA department to develop a social justice project for all 8th grade students to be implemented between September 2018 and June 2019. Students will focus on how they can identify an issue in their community and through research identify strategies to affect positive change. Social justice projects will focus on student to student, student to staff, and student to community relationships. This will be complemented by ELA units focusing on the role and perspective of adolescents in society. ● Students will have to follow through on a strategy to positively affect the community issue they have identified in some form, and write a paper in which they incorporate research, evidence and reflection as a response to their social justice project. ● Select students will participate in presentations to local politicians to advocate for their research areas. ● By participating in a social justice project, students will be more engaged in the learning community and develop greater agency for equity in their community as well as a deeper understanding of their efficacy. By facilitating this project teachers will also be critical agents in supporting that ownership. This aligns to our theory of action of shared ownership and collaboration. ● The School Climate Committee will implement comprehensive intervention and support framework and professional development, including advisory, PBIS, Peer Mediation, Conflict Resolution, Crises Intervention, Mentoring, Student Government, and peer mentoring. ● Use OORS and student survey data to identify areas of concern and inform supports, and monitor progress of school tone. ● Monitor school uniform compliance rate, and survey students to elicit better ways to promote uniform compliance Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Students September-June Teachers of all subjects and all students, Assistant Principal of Youth Development and student support All Students September-June Guidance Counselors, AP of Youth Development, SAVE Teacher, PBIS Coordinator, Student Council Coordinator, Business Manager 0 ● Train staff in developing empathy and restorative practices to reduce disproportional discipline outcomes for boys of color ● Ensure PBIS activities are appealing to all by surveying students and monitoring how broad participation is ● Liaison with the after school to ensure consistency of tone ● Conduct month to month surveys , hold student forums and focus groups to address areas that undermine respect, such as bullying, Respect For All concerns, and feeling safe in hallways and stairwells ● Incorporate student council in giving a student voice and agency to addressing respect and safety ● Develop Partnership with The Mobile Response Team and Astor Services for Children and Families to provide targeted intervention to support student mental health. Targeted students as determined by specific case data. September-June Counseling Staff. Astor Mental Health providers, school counselors ● Implement Peer Group Connect program, where trained teachers select and prepare suitable 8th grade students to mentor targeted 6th grade students with a guided program and under supervision. The program is designed to promote student leadership and to leverage the influence of older peers in a positive way to promote respectful relationships. 100 targeted 6th grade students, 20 targeted 8th grade students January-June Peer Group teachers, school counselor, AP of YD 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, 2018, the Parent Coordinator and the Administrative Staff will host an open house for each grade, addressing PBIS/school-climate values and school and family partnership and responsibilities. In November, 2018, students with the support of teachers will host student led family conferences to monitor individual social-emotional goals. On Tuesday afternoons from September to June, teachers will host parent meetings focused on individual feedback for student social-emotional goals. 1  On the third Wednesday of the month on the day of the Parent Association meeting, from September to June, in the morning and afternoon, the Parent Coordinator will host a family forum on current issues and family support with respect to school climate. From September to June, families will receive updates via calendar letter, email, Skedula online communicator, and school messenger, with respect to school climate. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Teacher Team Meetings on Monday and weekly Common Planning Time for Social Studies Teachers. ● Bi Weekly Climate Committee meeting and PBIS meetings. ● AP of Youth Development ● Guidance Staff ● Collaborative planning on YPAR implementation using Focus School Set Aside Funds ● Center for Supportive Schools, Peer Group Connection mentoring program Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 survey, at least 55% of students will agree that students treat each other with respect and that students rarely or never harass, bully, or intimidate other students at their school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Survey Monkey survey with targeted questions administered to all students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. From the 2017-2018 Quality Review: (4.2) All teachers engage in structured collaborations, promoting the implementation of Common Core Learning Standards while pedagogical practice, assessment data, and student work is analyzed. There are distributed leadership structures embedded. From the 2017-2018 School Perception Survey: 81% of teachers say that teachers are eager to try new ideas. (Q1d) ● Our strength is implementing strong practices of coherent curriculum, instruction with multiple entry points, and student centered, engaging instruction based on individualized data from common core aligned assessments. ● Our need is to share strategies to improve intellectually engaging classroom practice of all teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of all teachers will inter-visit with a peer on a specific, selected area from Danielson (selected based on the area of focus chosen in the Initial Planning Conference) as measured by an online tool, so that 75% of all teachers make at least one level of progress in their selected area as measured on the HEDI scale on their Advance observations. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers collaboratively developed the Instructional Focus of Literacy in all content areas. All Students September-June Literacy annotation and short answer response instructional strategies will be chosen/developed collaboratively by teachers. School-wide, on a quarterly basis teachers will be rated in the Danielson component they have targeted for improvement in Advance. Students will be assessed on their implementation of the school-wide literacy strategy in school-wide "snapshot" assessments. All Students September-June All Students September-June All students. September-June On a quarterly basis teachers will be engaged in identifying and reflecting on their performance in these areas, and focusing on identifying goals and strategies for improvement based on calibrated administrative feedback. Performance on the literacy strategies will be recorded and disaggregated using Skedula, as well as in individual Student Assessment Portfolios in each content area. Following each assessment teachers will focus on trends in performance and identify instructional strategies to support gaps in performance and understanding for individuals as well as subgroups and combinations of subgroups. Professional Development, observations, coaching and collaborative planning will focus specifically on targeted Danielson components, as well as analyzing data for trends in targeted subgroups and making adjustments to curriculum and resources based on those trends, as well as implementing research based strategies to use appropriate and high quality scaffolds and extensions for targeted subgroups to support progress towards goals. Target support of subgroups in RTI programming such as AIS groups and MyOn classroom independent reading tech based program. Teachers of all subjects, and all students, Teacher Leaders School Leaders Teachers of all subjects, and all students, Teacher Leaders School Leaders Data Specialist Teachers of all subjects, and all students, Teacher Leaders School Leaders Teachers of all subjects, and all students, Teacher Leaders School Leaders Data Specialist 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, 2018, the Parent Coordinator and the Administrative Staff will host an open house for each grade, addressing the family-teacher partnership in supporting student literacy. In November, 2018, students with the support of teachers will host student led family conferences to monitor progress in literacy in all contents. On Tuesday afternoons from September to June, teachers will host parent meetings focused on content area literacy. On the third Wednesday of the month on the day of the Parent Association meeting, from September to June, in the morning and afternoon, the Parent Coordinator will host a family forum on current issues and family support with respect to family-teacher partnerships in supporting student literacy. From September to June, families will receive updates via calendar letter, email, Skedula online communicator, and school messenger, with respect to content area literacy. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Weekly vertical subject Teacher Team meetings on Mondays to support Professional Development and collaboration on curricular units, inquiry work, assessment development, norming and monitoring. ● Weekly horizontal cross subject common Planning periods. ● After school collaborative planning time using Title 1 funds. ● Instructional teacher leadership positions: 3 Peer Collaborative Teachers, 1 Demonstration Teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  By February 2019, 60% of teachers of all teachers will have inter-visited with a peer on a specific, selected area from Danielson and tracked their visit on a school wide online shared document, and 60% of teachers will have made at least one level of progress on the HEDI scale in their target area on Advance observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School based reflection and peer feedback tool for measuring implementation of literacy strategies, Advance observations. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. From the 2017-2018 Quality Review: (4.1) School leaders and multiple forms of peer support promotes the development of teachers, with effective feedback and next steps from frequent cycles of observation that accurately captures strengths, challenges, and next steps using the Danielson Framework for Teaching. From the 2017-2018 School Perception Survey: 93% of teachers say that the principal sets clear expectations for teachers about implementing what they have learned in professional development. (Q11e) ● Our strength is supporting professional growth with a clear vision and coherent professional development focused on increasing student engagement and closing the achievement gap. ● Our need is to better ensure consistency across every classroom so that students are receiving engaging and supportive instruction in all classes at all times. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leadership will support the professional development of staff so that all teachers with three years or less experience will score no less than developing in all elements of Danielson as measured by Advance observations. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Deepen the school community’s understanding of high-quality teaching through Professional Development on most frequently identified components from Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching, in order to improve outcomes for all students, particularly ENL students, SWD and Black and Hispanic students. School leaders will support teachers in the development and delivery of professional development throughout the 2018-2019 school year on the element from domain 3 teachers self-identified and from feedback from administration, identify department specific areas for leverage, share best practices that reflect standards for Effective and Highly Effective in each area, identify areas of growth based on prior observations of each other’s practice, inter visitation and collaborative planning, and develop personal development plans. Teachers and Administrators will participate in midyear teacher meetings to assess progress in practice and student performance, and revise plans as necessary. School leaders will support teacher leadership development of all teachers, so that all teachers lead a Professional Development activity over the course of the year. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers of all subjects, and all students September-June Teachers of all subjects, and all students, Teacher Leaders School Leaders Teachers of all subjects, and all students September-June Teachers of all subjects, and all students, Principals and assistant principals will visit each teacher’s classroom at least 4 times over the course of the year, and provide teachers with formative written or verbal feedback aligned to the competencies of the individual teacher’s choice, in order to improve outcomes for all students. Teachers will engage in individual goal setting and progress monitoring meetings with Administrators focused on making one level of progress in performance on the competencies of the teachers’ choosing. September-June Teachers of all subjects, and all students Teacher Leaders School Leaders Teachers of all subjects, and all students, School Leaders School leaders will coordinate teacher observation data with the performance of students on short written responses, particularly those of targeted subgroups. Administrators will provide individualized feedback and targeted support in use of appropriate and high quality scaffolds and extensions in order to improve student performance, Teachers of all subjects, and all students September-June Teachers of all subjects, and all students, Teacher Leaders 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement School Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, 2018, the Parent Coordinator and the Administrative Staff will host an open house for each grade, addressing family leadership and school-family partnership and responsibilities. In November, 2018, students with the support of teachers will host student led family conferences to monitor student progress. Families will partner with teachers in setting student goals. On Tuesday afternoons from September to June, teachers will host parent meetings, building collaborative involvement with families. On the third Wednesday of the month on the day of the Parent Association meeting, from September to June, in the morning and afternoon, the Parent Coordinator will host a family forum focused on opportunities for family leadership and engagement. From September to June, families will receive updates via calendar letter, email, Skedula online communicator, and school messenger, with respect to family leadership and engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Teacher leaders and coaches, Teacher Incentive Fund staff (Peer Collaborative Teachers and Demonstration Teachers), Principal, Assistant Principals and all teachers will coordinate and present professional development activities, inter visitations, and collaborative planning sessions throughout the year. Professional Development will be provided periodically during Monday Teacher Team time, as well as during non attendance days (September Preparation days, Election Day, Chancellor’s Day) and a Saturday retreat in January using Focus School Set-Aside funds. ● Principal will assign a literacy consultant to ELA teachers who will provide job-embedded professional development based on PD survey data and observation data, as well as teachers of subgroups and combined subgroups based on emergent data. ● All teachers and administrators will participate in the professional development, instructional rounds, and inter visitation activities. 9  ● All teachers will participate in the observation cycle, which will be facilitated by the Principal and Assistant Principals. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teachers with three years experience or less will score no less than Developing in all Danielson areas as measured by Advance observations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance rating Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. From the 2017-2018 Quality Review: (3.4) School leaders and faculty have established a culture of high expectations for all members of the school community, ensuring that commitment, learning, and college and career readiness are part of every school activity and partner with families to support all students in meeting the expectations. From the 2017-2018 School Perception Survey: 48% of families say that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a) 86% of families say that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d) ● Our strength is communicating and supporting high expectations for all students to achieve success. ● Our need is to better engage families in meaningful opportunities to partner with the school about their child's learning and to contribute to the success of the school and theri child. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 65% of parents and guardians will participate in a school event, either through volunteering or attending a celebration, workshop, parent leadership meeting, town hall, or attending a a presentation other than report card conferences, as measured by sign in sheets. 1 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents of all students September-June Teachers of all students, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A parent involvement committee will be formed, and will:  make sure teachers and parents are aware of the goal, and all the ways the goal of parent engagement can be met.  Parent swill receive a survey inviting them to indicate how they would like to volunteer or participate in a school event  Ensure teachers will engage in follow up/confirmation of  engagement. Support teachers to communicate about something positive to encourage parental communication.  Parents will earn various incentives, including PBIS incentives for children. Students will lead parent teacher conferences to encourage participation.  Coordinate Family Meeting Time on Tuesdays by cohort  Ensure translation of all relevant communications, meetings, workshops and resources  Principal will host monthly round tables, inviting all members of the parent community to give their feedback on school progress and initiatives The parent coordinator will use school messenger for auto calls and make clear parent teacher conference dates. Parents of all students September-June The school will leverage after School classes, fairs, shows and services to improve outreach for meetings. The parent coordinator and individual teachers will form email lists to communicate about participation. Teachers of all students, Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal 2 Translation support will be available in all important letters home, and at all conferences and meetings, in Spanish, Bengali and Arabic. September-June Parent Coordinator, Assistant Principal, ENL coordinator Parents of all students with a home language other than English Parent Learning workshops will be provided on Skedula, Common Core ELA and Math curriculum and home support, the adolescent learner, organizing for success, High School Application process and college and career readiness Parents will receive a report in February indicating their use of Skedula and their participation in Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Development Workshops on the Use of Skedula, and strategies to support student engagement. The report will also invite parents to indicate how to provide opportunities for family contributions. Parents of all students September-June Parents of all students September-June Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Title 1 Committee, Principal Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Title 1 Committee, Principal, All students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sports and Arts in Schools Musica De Camara MSQI CEI-PEA Theatre for a New Audience Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  School based Parent Support Workshops will be provided to school staff and parents, using Title 1 Funds Funds  Parent Coordinator will continue to be the liaison between school and families  School messenger and Skedula, to provide automated phone calls and mailings to families based on student attendance, upcoming events, student performance and progress, and school activities.  Teachers will use their Tuesday Afternoons for parent outreach, (Family Meeting Times), tracking communication with parents using a common school wide log and through the online grading system, Skedula. Supervisor of parent engagement will coordinate teacher roles and preparation for Tuesday afternoon Family Meeting Times, Family night, parent workshops, Parent Teacher Conferences, Parent Workshops, and parent involvement events designed to increase parent engagement and communication. 3  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 50% of parents and guardians will volunteer or participate in a school based event, either through attending a celebration, workshop, parent leadership meeting, town hall, volunteering, or attending a a presentation other than report card conferences. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher logs, sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Prior performance on state assessments, core course performance, performance on CCLS aligned assessments, teacher recommendation. Prior performance on state assessments, core course performance, performance on CCLS aligned assessments, teacher recommendation. Core course performance, performance on CCLS aligned assessments, teacher recommendation. Core course performance, performance on CCLS aligned assessments, teacher recommendation. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Guided reading, close reading, scaffolded writing, project based learning. Small group, tutoring. Small group, tutoring. Small group, tutoring. Small group, tutoring. Guided work, use of manipulatives, concrete operations support, project based learning. Online assessment, strategy and targeted assignment support. Guided practice on projects, content area reading and assignments, writing, project based learning. Online content area leveled texts and guided work. Guided practice on projects, content area reading and assignments, writing, project based learning. Online content area leveled texts and guided work. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, during expanded learning programming (cbo based after school), during after school and weekend tutoring sessions. During the school day, during expanded learning programming (cbo based after school), during after school and weekend tutoring sessions. During the school day and during expanded learning programming (cbo based after school). During the school day and during expanded learning programming (cbo based after school). 5  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) OORS data (crisis and recidivism), teacher recommendation, parent recommendation. Small group, whole class, one to one. During the school day and during expanded learning programming (cbo based after school). Instructional assimilation, crises intervention, mediation, substance abuse prevention and intervention, coping strategies, ant-bullying. 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 101 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide our STH population with the following supports: Access to school counselor support for at-risk counseling and adaptive support. Access to partner services such as the Mobile Crises Unit, to ensure students have access to services. Access to school supplies, including uniforms, backpacks, books, pens, pencils, paper, binders. Transportation support for families. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our strategies for recruitment are to promote our school identity as one that supports the whole child with a challenging, compassionate and collaborative atmosphere. We will solicit the best candidates using the DOE systems such as the New Teacher Finder, Hiring and Recruitment Fairs, and the Open Market Transfer System. We will rigorously interview multiple candidates for every position and have the most qualified perform a demonstration lesson. As we are identifying the most highly qualified candidates we will also be exposing them to our high standards for practice and professionalism. Candidates will be given the opportunity to participate in a learning community that values the vision of all participants and provides an opportunity to grow professionally. Thus prospective teachers will be invited to join a learning community where their input and ownership is crucial to the success of the school, and where their input matters. Our strategies for retention will be to foster professional engagement through programmed Teacher Team Meetings, common prep planning time, collaborative planning sessions and professional development retreats. There teachers will look at and respond to needs expressed in student work, deepen understanding of the CCLS, develop units of study, collaboratively lesson plan, and develop social-emotional student support strategies. Effective instructional strategies will be shared and supported. Additionally, better ways of meeting the needs of students and staff will be sought and implementation of these strategies will be planned. These practices will demonstrate to staff that they are valued professionals. Our strategies for assignments will be for teachers to be given an opportunity to pursue their own vision for the school through leadership in department planning and professional development, extra-curricular activities, electives and programs that draw on their talents. While teachers will be assigned to programs that align to their certification and expertise, they will also be given the opportunity to define their role in the learning community through this shared ownership. Our strategies for support are that teachers will receive mentoring from experienced veterans, and participate in a new teacher cohort to become oriented with the school’s culture and expectations, as well as receive support in practical areas such as classroom management, planning, and school procedures. Teachers will receive targeted professional development opportunities from coaches, administrators, mentors, exemplar teachers, peers and professional development vendors to support their individually expressed needs through surveys and individual professional development plans. Teachers will be provided access to title 1 funds under title 1 regulations to attain certification to become highly qualified in their assignment area. 9  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers, Principals, Assistant Principals, Para Professionals and staff are supported through professional development that enable all students to meet CCSS by a variety of means: Targeted PD plans for every teacher developed collaboratively with a supervisor during an initial planning conference District PD Consultant Support on CCSS (Generation Ready, Urban Institute for Minority Education) Teachers Incentive Fund support PD provided by central offices Internal PD provided by peers, coaches, teacher leaders and administration Collaborative study and reflection Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 0  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers develop assessments directly and develop the assessment strategy for their department collaboratively in teacher team meetings. Teachers are supported in assessment development by the lead teacher, literacy and math coach and peer instructional coaches. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section A, Section B, Section C, Section D, Section E Section A, Section B, Section C, Section D, Section E Section A, Section B, Section C, Section D, Section E Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal 678,505 0 17,614 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 5,764,107 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual 1  identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy 1. maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school I. General Expectations Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) The Castle Hill Middle School 127 and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Art (ESSA) (participating children), agree that this Compact, outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for improved student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the State’s high standards. IV. Adoption This School Parental Involvement Policy has been developed jointly with, and agreed on with, parents of children participating in Title I, Part A programs, as evidenced by PA executive board ratification. This policy was adopted by the Castle Hill Middle School 127 in September 2018 and will be in effect for the period of the 2018-2019 school year. The school will distribute this policy to all parents of participating Title I, Part A children on or before September 15, 2018. 3  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 3. The Castle Hill Middle School will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support to assist Title I, Part A schools in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance: 4.The Castle Hill Middle School 127 will coordinate and integrate parental involvement strategies under Title I, Part A with parental involvement strategies under the following other programs:  Monthly workshops will be provided in the content areas of Literacy, Math, Science, Social Studies as well as art enrichment and Online Grading Tools such as Skedula for the parents and family members.  Parents will share in the responsibility for student performance through Parent/Teacher Conferences, School Leadership meetings, and Intervention conferences. 6. The Castle Hill Middle School 127 will build the schools’ and parents capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents, and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: 1. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph- 1. the State’s academic content standards 2. the State’s student academic achievement standards 3. the State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators:  The parents will be provided with workshops that address the content areas, school, district and regional level.  The parents will be provided with Professional development to enable all children to meet the City and State performance standards.  The parents will be provided with materials and supplies. 2. The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate to foster parental involvement. By:  Providing life skill workshops  After school Parent Committee  Providing Parenting Workshops targeting needs of Adolescent learners  Providing Common Core Math support workshops including online resources  Providing support in the use of Skedula  Providing Common Core literacy support workshops 4  3. The school will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil personnel, principal and other staff, in how to reach out to communicate with, and work with the parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools, by: Description of How School Will Implement Required Parental Involvement Policy Components Parental Involvement and School Quality 1. The Castle Hill Middle School 127 will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA:  parents and families of students will be provided with the opportunities to participate in school-based planning committees, and in School Leadership Teams.  Parents will be provided with the opportunities to participate in decisions of rules and regulations regarding budget expenditures  Parents will be provided with an opportunity to establish a school-level Parent Advisory Committee 2. The Castle Hill Middle School will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA:  Parents will be provided with information and meetings to develop knowledge of instructional programs, assessment for state and city standards, Students Code of Behavior.  Orientation meetings will be held to present the overall goals of our, as well as, the goals of the cohorts, grades and classes. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The Castle Hill Middle School 127 will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of the parental involvement policy in improving the quality of its Title I, Part A schools. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies by:  Conducting a needs assessment survey along with the PA/PTA, School Leadership Team and Parent Volunteers, and Parent Coordinator.  Providing parents with resources to outreach, and network with other parents, and involve them in the school community.  Providing translation to help parents who have limited English proficiency.  Conducting outreach activities for new parents and non-English speaking parents. Discretionary School Parental Involvement Policy Components In addition to the above described Parent Involvement Policy, Castle Hill Middle school will take the following steps to increase and improve parent involvement. 5   Provide babysitting at School Leadership and Parent Association meetings for children aged three to seven, by volunteer parents and teachers.  Offer parents opportunities to participate in leadership conferences with CSA and UFT, enhancing their leadership capacity.  Arrange flexible opportunities for parents to be involved, including but not limited to meetings and workshops during mornings and school hours, weekends, and meetings at alternate locations.  Providing access to the local library and community based organizations during parent-teacher conferences.  Provide access and support to online grading tools to increase reciprocal communication and parental exposure and involvement with student progress  Provide access to community resources such as computer training, health services, and English as a Second Language services based on availability.  School-Parent Compact (SPC) School - Parent Compact 2018-2019 The Castle Hill Middle School 127 and the parents of the students participating in activities, services, and programs funded by Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Art (ESSA) (participating children), agree that this Compact, outlines how the parents, the entire school staff, and the students will share the responsibility for improved student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build and develop a partnership that will help children achieve the State’s high standards. This School-Parent Compact is in effect during the school year 2018-2019. Required School-Parent Compact Provisions I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum The School Parental Involvement Policy may include additional paragraphs listing and describing other discretionary activities that the school, in consultation with its parents, chooses to undertake to build parents’ capacity for involvement in the school and school system to support their children’s academic achievement, such as the following discretionary activities listed under section 1118(e) of the ESSA:  involving parents in the development of training for teachers, principals, and other educators to improve the effectiveness of that training;  providing necessary literacy training for parents from Title I, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training;  paying reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including   transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school-related meetings and training sessions; training parents to enhance the involvement of other parents; in order to maximize parental involvement and participation in their children’s education, arranging school meetings at a variety of times, or conducting in-home conferences between teachers or other educators, who work directly with participating children, with parents who are unable to attend those conferences at school; adopting and implementing model approaches to improving parental involvement;   developing appropriate roles for community-based organizations and businesses, including faith-based organizations, in parental involvement activities; and 6   providing other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under section 1118 as parents may request.  I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships 4. The school will take the following action to ensure that information related to the school and parent-programs, meeting, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent possible, in the language the parents can understand: translated calendar letters and notices. Translated school messenger notices. Bilingual teachers and staff available at family conferences and workshops for translation and support.  By encouraging the parents to volunteer and training them in the strategies that will enhance a meaningful I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff relationship and partnership  Encouraging parents and staff to network and communicate with each other.  Providing guidance and expectations in the use of Skedula for reciprocal communication.  Providing evening assemblies, weekend festivals and events, functions and school concerts, which can foster participation by the parents and school personnel together.  Parents will be notified through a monthly calendar, letters, emails, auto-calls and flyers as to the date and time of meetings and workshops to address parent programs and Instructional activities. Letters are available in other translations if needed.   Telephone Numbers are also available for parent to contact the school and Parent Coordinator if need be.  Parent Bulletin Board located in the mail lobby is updated on a daily bases and displays; monthly school calendar, monthly school menu, information on parent/student resources, notices of workshops and upcoming events at school or at other locations, monthly CEC meeting notices.  Parent Coordinator sends out weekly/bi-weekly emails with important dates and information.  Parents receive monthly “Parent Newsletter” sent home with students and emailed by the Parent Coordinator.  The Department of Education Translation & Interpretation Unit is used by the Parent Coordinator, Pupil Accounting Secretary and Medical Room staff when needed.  Upon registration the Parent Coordinator meets with the parent of the incoming student, providing information about the school and other resources.  Upon registration of an ELL student, the Parent Coordinator and Assistant Principal meet with the parent for an ELL Parent Orientation. Providing the parent with “ELL Parent Information Packet” and ELL Parent information video is viewed at the time. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents SCHOOL RESPONSIBILITIES The Castle Hill Middle School 127 will: In order to help achieve the 2018-2019 SCEP Sections 5a and 5c, School Adminsitrators will:   Provide families with periodic information on school based assessments  Provide families with resources to understand the importance of assessments for college and career readiness  Provide families with guidance and support in accessing school resources to increase student performance   Provide families with specific feedback on student performance on school based assessments  Provide families with specific resources to prepare for school based assessments In order to help achieve the 2017-2018 SCEP Sections 5a and 5c, Teachers will: 7   Provide families with specific feedback to improve skills based on student performance on school based assessments  As indicated in Danielson’s Principle 1: Provide performance that demonstrates knowledge of content and pedagogy in order to better engage their learners In order to help achieve the 2018-2019 SCEP Section 5d, Teachers and administration will:   Provide multiple notices of Skedula workshops and access  Provide numerous accessible workshops on Skedula usage  Provide targeted support on Skedula access and usage issues and needs  Provide up to date student performance data on Skedula  Provide access to technology to support Skedula usage  Additionally teachers and administration will provide high quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables the participating children to meet the State’s student academic achievement standards as follows: the establishment of smaller learning communities through the formation of cohorts   provide students and parents with the dates of city-wide and statewide assessments and preparation opportunities  provide AIS programs for General Education, Special Education and English Language Learners in preparation for city and state exams in ELA and Math  AIS committee to review and make recommendations for services for at risk students  provide opportunities for student’s to discuss their concerns and to be aware of support services available to them through Group Guidance sessions  provide SAPIS intervention on an as need basis  Monthly Calendar and Principal’s Letter discussing upcoming activities, meetings, exams, and other information pertinent to the school community  provide Vacation Week Work Packets in both English Language Arts and in Math during the Holiday recesses  classroom instruction in the Point of Entry Model provides for whole class, small group, and independent work  provide Castle Hill Middle School Handbook to all students  hold parent-teacher conferences during which this Compact will be discussed as it related to the individual child’s achievement. Dates to be determined and announced by the Department of Education. As well as, meetings with parents of English Language Learners (ELL) (in addition to school-wide Parent Teachers Conferences) IEP meetings with parents of Special Education students (on-going)   meetings with Grade 8 students and their parents to discuss graduation requirements and high school programs/options available  provide parents with frequent reports on their children’s progress. Specifically, the school will provide reports as follows: report cards are issued 4 times a year (parents are required to pick up the first two report cards, in person)   on the report card teachers provide comments about student’s progress as well as provide a grade for academic progress, level of achievement, and behavior  progress letters/”in danger of failing letters” are sent to parents between the issuing of report cards to help  monitor a student’s progress student’s with particular difficulties, especially where behavior can interfere with academic achievement, may be placed on a Daily Individual Section Sheet, which monitors daily progress by period in areas such as attendance, lateness, class work, homework, and conduct - these sheets are to be signed by parent/guardian and returned daily  meetings between parents and members of the child’s cohort can be arranged to discuss progress   the Attendance Office notifies parents if a child is absent or late twice in one week via weekly mailings the Attendance Office and/or Attendance Teacher notifies parents via mailings, phone calls and/or on-site visits to the home if there seems to be a problem with unexplained and/or excessive lateness or absence 8   bi-weekly meetings with the Pupil Accounting Secretary, the Attendance teacher, all attendance personnel, and the Guidance Department to discuss and take appropriate action on ACS cases, chronic absentees, and 407’s letters notifying parents if their student is not making adequate yearly progress and is in danger of not being promoted to the next grade and/or graduating   provide parents reasonable access to staff. Specifically, staff will be available for consultation with parents as follows:  Parent –Teacher Conference afternoons and evenings will be determined and announced by the Department of Education.  Cohort Meetings (all students)  Grade Meetings (all students)   ELL meetings (English Language Learners)  IEP reviews (Special Education students) special programs as communicated via letters and the school’s monthly calendar - which is sent home with students, as well as being posted and made available to the public in the Main Office  parents may call and make arrangements to meet with any staff member during one of their non-teaching periods if a translator is needed, and the school is notified in advance, every effort to provide one will be made   provide parents with opportunities to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities, as follows:  parents may contact the Parent Coordinator and volunteer their services to the school via the Learning Leader’s program  make arrangements with teachers to assist during class trips  make arrangements with the Assistant Principal and classroom teacher to visit the classroom and participate and/or observe a classroom activity  Honors and Awards Assemblies  Encourage attendance at Parent workshops and Parent Association monthly meeting , Safety Committee meetings, and student performances  Encourage attendance to extra-curricular events II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities PARENT RESPONSIBILITIES We, as parents, will support our children’s learning in the following ways:  In order to help achieve the 2018-2019 SCEP Section 5E: o Attend Every Parent Teacher Conference o Retrieve my Skedula log in information and Attend a Skedula training session if necessary o Use Skedula to monitor my child’s performance o Communicate with my child’s teachers about my child’s performance using Skedula or other means available to me 9  Support my child’s learning by making education a priority in our home by:  making sure my child is on time and prepared every day for school talking with my child about his/her school activities everyday scheduling daily homework time  monitoring attendance and punctuality  Update parent contact information (blue card) as soon as any changes occur.    providing an environment conducive for study  making sure that homework is completed  monitoring the amount and type of television my children watch  monitoring the amount of time my child spends on the internet, playing video games, using the telephone, etc. volunteering in my child’s school   participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s  education  promoting positive use of my child’s extra-curricular activities  participating in school activities on a regular basis  staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school, the Region, and the Department of Education, either received from my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate reading and discussing with my child everyday communicating positive values and character traits, such as respect, hard work, and responsibility as well as encourage demonstration of the Positive Behavior Intervention System of the school   Supporting teacher efforts by promoting good study habits Staying informed about their child's education and communicating with the school  modeling respect for the cultural differences of others     helping my child accept consequences for negative behavior  being aware of and following the rules and regulations of the   working with the school and supporting the school’s discipline policy   expressing high expectations and offering praise and encouragement for achievement  Monitor online grading tools and communicate with teachers on student progress monitoring school, the region, and of the Department of Education supporting the school’s uniform policy III. Student Responsibilities STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES We, as students, will share the responsibility to improve academic achievement and achieve the State’s high standards. Specifically, we will:  In order to help achieve the 2018-2019 SCEP Section 5C: 0  o Set a specific goal for improvement on a standard based skill in every class, every quarter o Reflect on performance on specific tasks that measure these skills every quarter o Identify how to improve in these skills and work at our plan  In order to help achieve the 2018-2019 SCEP Section 5B: Identify an area for community improvement o o Come up with a plan to make a difference in the community in that area o Reflect quarterly on progress in this project come to school on time, ready to do our best and to be the best come to school with all the necessary tools of learning - pens, pencils, books, etc. listen to and follow directions     participate in class discussions and activities  be honest and respect the rights and possessions of others  follow the school’s and class’ rules of conduct by wearing our ARMOR everyday, which stands for Academic Respect, Management, Organization and Responsibility follow the school’s and specific grade’s dress code ask for help when we don’t understand something  use appropriate language within the school community    do our homework everyday and ask for help when we need it    use MyOn for independent reading   use the library to get information and to find books that we enjoy reading study for tests and assignments read at least 30 minutes everyday outside of school time get adequate rest every night  give to our parents or to the adult who is responsible for our welfare, all notices and information that we receive at school everyday and to bring back to school any correspondence and information as requested  access online grading tools such as Skedula to take personal responsibility for progress monitoring 1 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 60 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials &nbsp;During the regular school day, it is often challenging to group students by &nbsp;There are currently 808 students are MS127 of which 114 are ENL's.&nbsp; A Our focus for the Direct Instruction Supplemental Program is- a three hour, eight week Begin description here: · Saturday Academy for all ENL’s that will provide targeted instruction based on students NYSESLAT proficiency level. · demographic analysis of the ENL population indicates that 41 of our ENL's are at the emerging proficiency level, 70 are at the expanding proficiency level and 30 are at the transitioning level. Due to this wide spread distribution of data, we decided to service each proficiency level with supplementary-targeted instruction during Saturday Academy. · proficiency. The majority of our students are serviced through one of our Bilingual classes, which are grouped by language. Grouping by proficiency level allows teachers to dig deep into skills that are borderline for a specific level according to students’ common English Literacy needs and design instructional activities that aim at moving proficiency. A Saturday Academy Program has an environment that allows for this flexibility in grouping and instruction. · It is our goal that these ENL students will advance one proficiency level on the NYSESLAT exam. · small class sizes of no more than 20 students per class for each proficiency level. · Bilingual education &nbsp;teachers and two ELA content specialists. · Bilingual Teacher. The Transitioning class will be taught by one Bilingual Teacher and one ELA content teacher. The Expanding class will be taught by one ENL teacher and one ELA content teacher. · ending January 5th, 2019, for 8 Saturdays.&nbsp; No program will take place November 24th, December 29th due to the holiday breaks. · supervisor is present in the building supervising another program.&nbsp; · sessions will provide intense instruction in phonics, decoding, vocabulary development, conversational skills and listening exercises through high-interest lessons in literature, writing, reading and grammar. · and Mathematics (1.5 hours). · students. Smart boards, Ipads and computers will be used in providing listening stations, videos, visuals and learning games to help increase engagement and incorporate the use of technology. Sessions will be divided into two instructional blocks: English Language Arts (1.5 hours) The Assistant Principal of the ELL department will supervise the program when no other Our Saturday Academy for ENL's will service approximately 60 students allowing for &nbsp;Classes will be taught by two of our fully certified ESL teachers, two of our The Entering and Emerging level class will be taught by one ENL teacher and one &nbsp;The sessions will run from 9:00am-12:00pm starting November 3rd, 2018 and &nbsp;Instruction will focus on growing the English proficiency of students. These &nbsp;Teachers will scaffold Native Language supports as needed for individual 3  &nbsp;All records of student and staff attendance as well as programs Teachers will be using a combination of the Engage NY ELA Curriculum, Achieve 3000, Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information · Great Leaps,&nbsp; Rosetta Stone, Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT and grade wide CCLS aligned ELA and Math classroom materials. · notifications&nbsp; to parents will be kept in an Binder labeled “2018-2019 ENL Title III Program”, located in the Assistant Principal of ENL’s office, room 343. · Our ENL After-School Program will start two weeks after our Saturday Program ends and will&nbsp; follow the same format as our Saturday Program in terms of aimed number of students, classes, grouping of students according to NYSESLAT proficiency levels and teachers. The focus of the after school program will be to continue building English Literacy and also NYSESLAT test preparation. · Wednesday and Thursdays&nbsp;from 2:30pm-5:00pm and will be taught by the same teachers ENL, TBE and ELA Content teachers from our Saturday Program. The After-School Program will run from February 6th, 2019 until&nbsp; April 18th, 2019.&nbsp; · funding sources. The school will compensate&nbsp;the cost of the Title III Program Activities using other &nbsp;The After-School Program will run 2 days a week for a total of 20 sessions, Teacher Collaboration meeting time is built in to each teachers’ program on Mondays &nbsp;All ENL teachers will attend at least two Network or DOE sponsored professional rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: · from 2:30-3:50pm.&nbsp; Bi-weekly, all teachers of ENL’s meet for a 40 minute period together with the Assistant Principal for ENL's. This time is spent sharing best practices, examining data, exploring the latest research based strategies, and lesson planning collaboratively.&nbsp; · development workshops of their choosing. · Series at Bank Street College sponsored by the DOE.&nbsp; · School in the Bronx to observe best practices in ENL instruction.&nbsp; · and turnkey their findings with the department.&nbsp; · &nbsp;In house PD will be given and facilitated by the certified teachers in the department once a month during our monthly meetings or at a lunch and learn session. · · attendance sheets will be kept in the ENL 2018-2019 Compliance Binder located in the Assistant Principal of ENL’s office, room 343. · for four months, dates to be determined.&nbsp; · &nbsp;The AP of ENL will facilitate PD once every quarter for the ENL department. &nbsp;All records of teachers Professional Development including agendas and &nbsp;All ELL teachers will conduct and an Action Research Project of their choosing CEI will continue to provide Professional Development for ENL teachers once weekly &nbsp;The three ENL certified teachers will be attending the Beyond the Language As a department, we will be visiting one school in Queens and one Dual Language Topics for Professional Development will include but are not limited to: 4  Part C: Professional Development Topic 1: DELLS 2018 Language Series: Multiple Pathways to Learning in the Age of Accountability. Date: October 27, 2018. Name of Provider: Bank Street College. Rationale: To strengthen ENL content pedagogy. Audience: 3 ENL Teachers, Mr. Bakkas, Ms. Mercado, Ms. Koneva. Topic 2: Inter-visitation The New Venture School IS 219, Bronx, NY. Dates: 10/17/18, 11/14/2018, 12/17/2018 Time: 9:00am-12:00pm Name of Provider: IS219 Rationale: To observe best practices in Dual Language Spanish Program. Audience: Seven MS 127 teachers: Ms. Koneva, Ms. Mercado, Mr. Capellan, Mr. Ray, Ms. Giustino, Mr. Mateo, Mr. Mejia. Topic 3: Inter-visitation to John Adams High School 480, Queens, NY Rationale: To observe best practices in a Transitional Bilingual Bengali Program and ESL push in services. Dates: 10/17/18, 11/14/2018, 12/17/2018 Time: 12:30-2:30pm Name of Provider: 27Q480 Audience: Seven MS 127 teachers and the AP: Ms. Nahar, Mr. Hafiz, Ms. Alsumi, Ms. Islam, Mr. Mejia, Ms. Walsh, Ms. Osefinana. Topic 4: Monthly ELL Department Data meetings. Rationale: ELL teachers meet with the ESL coordinator and AP of ELL’s the first Tuesday of each month specifically to analyze department wide data. We use the EDUR to examine department wide data and trends to plan targeted instruction. The team identifies trends, evaluates students’ performance, plans targeted strategies to address gaps and deficiencies and shares best practices. Date: First and third Tuesday of each month. Time: 2:30pm-3:30pm Name of Provider: MS 127 ENL Department Staff and various guest District 11 Service Coordinators and Administrators. Audience: ENl teachers **Additional Workshops will be attended throughout the year on a rotating basis by ENL teachers as schedules are published by DELLS. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities 5  ENL Parent workshops will be held throughout the year in order for parents of ENL &nbsp;Parents will be notified through appropriately translated flyers, letters, monthly &nbsp;Parental engagement workshops have been scheduled every first Saturday of the Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Begin description here: · students to keep appraised of student progress, student learning goals and topics, and to celebrate student participation in supplemental education programs. · calendars and translated phone calls by our TBE teachers as needed. · month starting Saturday, October 6, 2018 through June 1, 2019. Workshop dates are as follows: October 6, 2018 from 10am-12pm. November 3, 2018 from 10am-12pm. December 1, 2018 from 10am-12pm. January 5, 2019 from 10am-12pm. February 2, 2019 from 10am-12pm. March 2, 2019 from 10am-12pm. April 6, 2019 from 10am-12pm. May 4, 2019 from 10am-12pm. June 1, 2019 from 10am-12pm. · Parents”, "Accessing Student Progress through Pupil Path”, “The High School Process for ENL’s”, "Preparing your child for the NYS ELA and Math Exam” “Preparing for the NYSESLAT Exam”, “How to help your child with Homework”, and “Help with Technology for Parents.” · Workshops are provided by ENL teachers, the Parent Coordinator, the ENL Guidance Counselor and Learning Leaders. · adults Monday-Thursday, 6pm-9pm.&nbsp;Refreshments will be served at each meeting.&nbsp; · translated notices that are sent home, translated phone calls and/or via Pupil Path messenger.&nbsp; · members to translate written materials, conduct face to face conferences/meetings and make phone calls to parents in their preferred language of communication.&nbsp; &nbsp; All records of agendas, attendance and invitations in parents’ preferred languages will be kept in a Parent Engagement Binder for the 2016-2017 school year located in the PC’s room 100A. We have also partnered with the YMCA for New Americans and offer ESL classes for Parents are informed about school events and kept abreast of their child's progress by Topics will include but are not limited to: “MS 127’s Parent Orientation for ENL We utilize the DOE’s Language Interpretation Unit as well as our bilingual Staff Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services Per session Per diem 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1. NA High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. NA Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Castle Hill Middle School 127 Borough Bronx School Number 127 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Harry Sherman Coach David Soares ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Bella Giustino Teacher/Subject Area Sabrin Abedin/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Abdul Hafiz/Math Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Meisha Ross Porter Assistant Principal Jennifer Brooks Coach Michele Dorsainvil School Counselor Espinal Parent type here Parent Coordinator Isa Tejeda Field Support Center Staff Member Wladimir Pierre Other (Name and Title) Yina Mercado, Data Specialist C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 4 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 743 8 Total number of ELLs 133 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.90%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish, Bengali If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2012-13 2012-13 K 0 1 2 3 4 Lang. Spanish Bengali Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 1 0 1 7 2 2 0 4 8 2 1 0 3 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 4 4 0 0 0 0 8 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As a school wide community, we will use Fountas and Pinnell to assess the early English literacy skills of ELL’s. All four of our ESL certified teachers will be trained by the Literacy coach and AIS coordinator. The assessment will be implemented and students will be tested in September as a baseline and June as final assessment to measure their progress. New to this year, our ESL team will create an Individualized English Literacy Plan (IELP) for every ELL student. The IELP will be reviewed three times a year, beginning, middle and end. The Individualized English Literacy Plan will contain vital information such as ELL students Lexile Level, Fontas and Pinnel Diagnostic Information, NYSESLAT AND NYSITELL Levels, Targeted Instructional Strategies for the classroom, Support Services, Running Records from previous teachers, Social/Family History and Native Language proficiency. The IELP will be a key source of guiding instruction and professional development. Spanish speaking students are given EL SOL as a baseline for their Literacy in Spanish. We have not found early literacy assessments for Bengali, Urdu, Akon, Mandingo, Wolof and Arabic, however, the ESL teachers use translation software and a social and family interview 9  to get a general idea of whether or not a student can read or write in their primary language until such materials become available. These assessments revealed what was predicted, that the majority of our ELL students are reading well below their grade level in English and in general, do not have strong literacy skills in their Native Languages. The assessment results show us that we must make building early literacy skills in both English as well as students primary languages a priority in order to successfully strengthen students overall Literacy. This year, ESL teachers will be providing NLA to our TBE Spanish and Bengali students to strengthen their foundational literacy and to comply with State mandates. We will continue to teach strategies as we address various learning styles, conferencing with individual students to determine strengths and weaknesses as well as determine next steps in order to change skill deficiencies into proficiencies. Teachers assist students with the setting of SMART goals which are aligned with the ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science department goals. We disseminate pre and post assessments and quarterly tasks to assess whether or not students are meeting their goals during the interim. Upon completion of interim assessments, teachers develop a new plan of action to ensure that students continue to make progress towards their goal. We continue to find more effective ways to assess and teach early literacy skills to meet the varying needs of all ENLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? In the upcoming school year, we are partnering with the Middle School Quality Initiative and will be giving them assessments through out the year and focus on improving the literacy of our ELLS as a whole. The MSQI team will work closely with us to implement a set of research based adolescent literacy practices. Our school will receive resources to help us get the materials we need to implement new teaching practices. We will delve into highly successful programs for middle school students like Word Generation (academic vocabulary program), debate league, a poetry curriculum and slam, specialized reading programs for students who need it and more. Along with these timely assessments, we plan on doing the above so that we can see trends among the data from each assessment. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ESL team meets bi-weekly to consistently monitor, evaluate and make adjustments to instruction, services and curriculum.There are many ways in which we evaluate the success of our programs for ELLS. Although improving academic success for ELLs is a multi-pronged challenge, we ensure that teachers in our ENL programs are a huge part of the decision making process when it comes to deciding which program would be the best fit for an ELL that enters our building. As said previously, the ELL’s proficiency in his or her L1 is noted and through that, and the home language survey form, we place the ELL in his or her designated class. We conduct interviews with the ELLS as well as hold peer conferences, and have them write in journals to see if we are meeting their social and emotional needs as well as their academic needs. Tackling both is a challenge, but we believe our programs can only be successful if our ELLS feel comfortable in the settings in which they are placed in, given that they are in a whole new country with educational norms that are far different than the one that they are accustomed to. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We provide ample professional development to help our content area teachers who teach freestanding classes so that they can differentiate among the general Ed students and the freestanding ELLS in their specific content areas. Through the PDs we provide, they are able to create a comprehensible framework for delivering academic instruction. Through the explicit instruction in literacy strategies, vocabulary and background knowledge taught to ELLS in all of our programs with the methods of teaching for that specific program, and through that, we are able to evaluate the success of our programs by seeing the growth of these students in the formative and summative assessments that are given to them after their very first assessment. For the bilingual programs at our school, teachers include first-language instruction or instruction in their native language to help ensure that they are meeting the needs of students who are proficient in their L1, so they can slowly transition them into successfully learning the L2. Because we make ELL achievement a schoolwide focus, our programs have been successful thus far by simply looking at the data from the previous years’ NYSESLAT scores. We make the final evaluation of the success of our programs by noting how many students were able to improve on the NYSESLAT or even pass out of ENL as commanding learners. We also look at their standardized exams and compare the growth of the ELLs in each one of our programs. We continue to monitor ELLs’ progress even after they have been classified as being proficient in English. The number of students 0  that classify as being proficient in English towards the end of the year tell us that we have been successful in creating these programs for our ELLs where we can truly meet their needs. Lastly, in the past couple of years, our ENL department went from an area of recommendation to an area of strength in terms of leveraging strong practice for the growth of the learning community (in fact, two of our bilingual teachers were identified and used as models by the Office of Teacher Effectiveness in videos last year). 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As a result of the NYSESLAT data for the 2016-2017 school year, the majority of students were advanced in proficiency levels across grade levels but scored in the level 1 or 2 range on the NYS ELA and Math Exams. We did not have any ENL students taking the Regents Exam last year. We did have a few Former ELL's who took the exam. This year we made program changes and 8 ENL students will be taking the Math and Earth Science Regents. According to this year’s incoming ELL students LABR and NYSITELL scores, the majority of our ENL students are scoring at the beginner level of proficiency. The AMAO tool is not working properly. We are working out the kinks in order to be able to electronically sort and view our ELL data. Until then, we are utilizing ATS to print reports and we have created our own Excel spreadsheet. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We have ENL meetings bi-monthly to disseminate and analyze these findings together with all the ENL teachers that teach these students. We discuss what adjustments would needed to be made by making our teachers part of the decision making process since they know their students. We also give student surveys to make students part of the decision making process as well. Through these discussions, we make adjustments that would be best fit for our programs. For example, in the upcoming school year (2017-2018), we are not going to have our Arabic bilingual program due to not having enough students to have a class. If however, in the beginning of the school year we see that there are indeed enough students, we are ready to make those changes. Likewise, with our Bilingual Spanish classes, we are going to have 7th and 8th bridge classes due to the number of students in each grade. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. For students whose parents select Freestanding ENL we have one blocked grouping, Freestanding/General Education, heterogeneously group class per grade ( one sixth grade, one seventh grade, one eight grade). ESL minutes are provided by an ESL certified teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. For the 2017-2018 school year, MS 127 will offer English Language Learners in grades six, seven and eight, heterogeneously grouped in free standing classes, and Transitional Bilingual Education classes in Spanish and Bengali. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 1  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Transitional Bilingual Education Classes:All of our grade level, mixed proficiency ability, TBE classes are taught ESL by their certified ESL teacher for minimum of 8 periods a week, no less than 360 minutes of ESL instruction for all students. This ensures that the entering and emerging level students are receiving their mandated 360 minutes of ESL instruction and transitioning and expanding level students are receiving their mandated 180 minutes of ENL instruction as well as their mandated 180 minutes of ELA instruction. Native Language Arts instructional minutes are delivered as follows:In accordance with NYS CR 154, students at the entering and emerging level of English proficiency will receive content area instruction in the Native Language and English with a 75/25 balance that gradually increases the English Language instruction according to students’ needs and progress. Students at the transitioning level of English proficiency will receive content area instruction in the Native Language and English with a 50/50 balance that gradually increases the English Language instruction according to students’ needs and progress. Students at the expanding level of English proficiency will receive content area instruction in the Native Language and English with a 25/75 balance that gradually increases the English Language instruction according to students’ needs and progress. Native Language instruction and support at the very minimum remain 25% regardless of students’ English proficiency or progress. Freestanding ESL/General Education Classes: ENL students in the six, seventh and eight grade who are not in the transitional bilingual classes receive Free Standing ESL services and are placed in the one, heterogeneously grouped Freestanding/General education class per grade. The certified ESL teacher teaches these classes 360 minutes of ENL instruction at minimum. In accordance with NYS CR 154, Native Language Arts instruction and supports are delivered at the minimum of 25%. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ESL instruction is delivered similarly in Transitional Bilingual Education Classes and Free standing ESL classes with the exception that in TBE classes, instruction in giving in both the Native Language (Spanish, Bangla, Arabic) and English according to proficiency levels and CR154 mandated percentages and students individual needs as described previously. The following are implemented in all Free Standing ENL and TBE classes for the ESL/ELA content area.ESL/ELA:- Learning/ Language objectives in each of the four modalities (reading, writing, listening, speaking) are incorporated into lessons plans of all ELL teachers.- Tiered vocabulary is front loaded to provide scaffolded instruction.- ESL/ELA teachers provide focused standards-based instruction in the development of language and literacy within the Balanced Literacy reader’s and writer’s workshop models. - Teachers Teams align curriculum to the Common Core State Standards, develop CCLS aligned Curriculum Maps and the collaboratively develop the mandated Instructional Units for ELLS’s ( Beginners/Intermediates= 2 units in ESL and 1 unit in their Native Language, Advanced= 1 unit in ESL, 1 unit in ELA and 1 unit in NA)- Classroom libraries are leveled and have a variety of books in English as well as Native Languages (Spanish and Bangla) in order to support and develop students Native Language skills and awareness.- Glossaries were printed, distributed, and teachers continue to instruct students on how to use them in class to aid in their language acquisition. - Teachers use and continue to develop Lateral Language Acquisition Strategies to enable students to acquire the Target Language (T2) and increase their understanding of abstract concepts and to make content comprehensible to enrich language development.- Teachers use and continue to develop a variety of research based instructional strategies such as SIOP and QTEL strategies, guided reading, thematic unit development, reciprocal teaching, scaffolding and retelling, literature circles, portfolio assessments, graphic organizers, REALIA (visuals and imagery), to deliver CCLS aligned rigorous and scaffold instruction to ELL’s.- Students are taught discussion and questioning techniques, utilize language partners, sentence starters, engage in dialoged conversations on a daily based in order to provide a sound education and increase language development.- Various forms of technology are used in order to enrich instructional experiences such as smart boards, lap tops, iPads, computers, listening stations, calculators, recorders, ELMOS, cameras Mathematics:- In addition to the strategies and methods mentioned above, MS 127 purchased the suggested CCLS aligned Mathematics textbooks for the CMP3 program in English and Spanish. - Tired vocabulary is front loaded to provide scaffolded instruction. - Language objectives in the four modalities ( listening, reading, writing and speaking) are incorporated into the lesson plans of all ELL teachers regardless of content area or program model. - When possible, assessments are translated for TBE and Free Standing ESL students into their Native Languages (Spanish, Bangla, 2  Urdu, Arabic, Haitian, Wolof, Twi,Mandingo) by their teachers using translation software, the translation unti or by hand. If assessments can not be translated, they are adapted and modified to better suit the instructional need of ELL's. Students work with teachers to evaluate which assessment they want to use or they may opt to utilize both versions for as long as they need. - In TBE classes instruction is delivered in both the native language (Spanish, Bangla, Arabic) and English according to proficiency levels and CR154 mandated percentages and students individual needs as described previously. Various strategies and methods are used to allow students access to the mathematical content while at the same time continuing to acquire English Language Literacy. Some of these strategies are: translated materials, texts, word problems, directions and procedures, rubrics written in student friendly language, word walls that are translated into native languages and English with visual images, glossaries, translation software, language peer partners, texts in native languages and instructional videos in native languages (Pearson, Math XL)- In ESL classes mathematics is taught in English with a minimum of 25% Native Language supports during instruction. This is achieved through translated materials, texts, word problems, worked out solutions, given answer keys, rubrics, word walls that are translated into native languages and English with visual images, glossaries, translation software, language peer partners, texts in native languages and instructional videos in native languages (Pearson, Math XL) Science and Social Studies:regardless- In TBE classes, instruction in giving in both the Native Language (Spanish, Bangla, Arabic) and English according to proficiency levels and CR154 mandated percentages and students individual needs as described previously. In Free Standing ESL Classes, instruction for Science and Social Studies is given in English with a minimum of 25% Native Language supports during instruction. The strategies and methods mentioned above are utilized by the Science and Social Studies teachers of ELL’s. Tired vocabulary is front loaded to provide scaffolded instruction. Language objectives in the four modalities (listening, reading, writing and speaking) are incorporated into the lesson plans of all ELL teachers regardless of content area or program model. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? -For Spanish speaking students, the LAB is offered in Spanish (LAB Spanish) and is used as a tool to assess primary language literacy and inform instructional needs and goals for teachers and students. - Our Spanish, Bengali and Arabic bilingual teachers use conferencing within the Workshop Model that is done in students’ native languages. For students in our Free Standing ESL classes that speak languages other than Spanish, Bangla and Arabic, teachers translate materials and assessments using translation software (Google translate, T-Tools, etc.) or adapt and modify assessments for ELL's. Assessments are kept in students portfolios and teachers review students’ progress throughout the year both individually and collectively. This process is done in conjunction with general education teachers, service providers and the entire ESL department during assessment norming meeting and general department meetings. All ENL teachers give some kind of native language baseline to all ENL students. A mid-year and end of year Native Language Assessment is also given to measure progress. Students in TBE classes produce work in their Native Languages throughout the year. Teachers grade and log their Native Language skills and progress. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a & b. For ELLS, we differentiate for Newcomers and SIFE by using the process of enculturation where we place them in bilingual classes with teachers that come from the same culture and speak the same language. These teachers use the students’ cultures in their teaching practices so that students are able to use prior knowledge in order to understand the material being taught at hand. Slowly, they adapt the process of acculturation where they adapt to dominant classroom norms by transitioning into the rigorous standard based curriculum. For students that are incapable to writing and reading in their first language, we use rigorous repetition of letters and phonics in their L1. Students are first taught to communicate effectively in their L1 before they gain input in their L2. They are taught to communicate effectively through the development of vocabulary, reading of simple texts that are written in both their L1 and L2 and writing journals so as to improve their writing skills where they write about their events on a daily basis. We also use sight words and flashcards in their L1 and L2 and each individual has their own set of tiered vocabulary based on their own individualized learning targets. Beginner packets are also created based on these individualized learning targets. Technology is a key component in the instruction of all ELLS but particularly newcomers. Students use Rosetta Stone, listen to recordings, watch videos, use interactive software to gain as 3  much as exposure as possible in their L1 as well as their L2. All newcomers are partnered with a buddy who they feel comfortable with, in order to help them with the transition of starting a new school in a new country. c) For developing ELLS, students are first assessed to see what they know as opposed to what they do not know. They are tested on the four modalities and data is analyzed from previous NYSESLAT scores to see which four of these modalities they are the most weak in as well as the modalities that they show the most strength in. Teachers then work on making individualized learning targets and hold student conferences so that students as well as all the teachers that teach them are well aware of what the student’s goals are for that specific year. They are provided with high quality standard based instruction in the four content areas (ELA, Math, Social Studies and Science) where they have access to varied and challenging curriculum and instruction that is aligned to and focused on grade level content and achievement standards. These students require specific and targeted academic intervention services. As with all students, teachers use data driven lessons that are targeted heavily in the four modalities in order to provide remedial skills and sufficient practice for these struggling students. Through summative and formative assessments, (NYSSELAT/LABR/NYS Exams, class assessments, teacher observations, student self-assessments/peer/group assessments), teachers identify the specific deficiencies students possess so targeted instruction can be developed and implemented. Students are provided continuous opportunities to work with partners/small groups/ one on one with teachers in developing skills in reading, writing, listening and speaking. They are grouped homogeneously based on their grade and NYSESLAT modality level in the beginning of the year so instruction can be specific and targeted to their individual needs. Overtime, groups are changed either homogeneously or heterogeneously based on the assessments from the day before. Teachers regularly are progress monitoring the students’ needs by identifying the areas of needed support, more instruction or changes in instruction. d) For long term ELLS who have completed six years of ENL services, teachers meet together with service providers to perform an in depth analysis of students’ individual circumstances and create individualized service/plans. The team meets quarterly to review students’ progress and adjust the plan. Teachers differentiate their lessons by making sure that these students receive literacy instruction using reading interventions such as Visions, Milestones, Rosetta Stone, leveled books and myOn which both use high interest, low level literature that provides access to varied and challenging curriculum and instruction that is aligned to and focused on grade level content and achievement standards, and content based reading in order for these students to learn the skills that they would need to learn by the end of their specific year’s grade. These students are pulled two to three times per week for Academic Intervention Services (AIS) where strategies in the four modalities (reading, writing, listening and speaking) are reiterated and practiced. e) Former ELL's that have only tested out two years ago and less are mandated to receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. To be in compliance with this mandate, the vast majority of these Former ELL's were moved into the one, grade-wide, Free-Standing/General Education class. Teachers are made aware of a students Former ELL status and the students portfolios are given to their teacher for review. In the beginning of the year the ESL department holds a meeting with the teachers of former ELL’s and goes over their portfolios/work/test scores and provides the teachers with instructional strategies for ELL’s. Professional Development is held throughout the year for general education teachers on ELL Instructional Strategies to help teachers provide the supports necessary for former ELL’s to succeed in mainstream classes. After their exit from ESL former ELL’s are given glossaries and are allowed their same testing accommodations for up to two years. Here at 127, we believe that a sound education should be provided to all students. We do our best to continue to support ELL’s and former ELL’s academic, social and emotional success and provide whatever accommodations we can to students for as long as they need it, even beyond the 2 year State Mandate. Formers ELL’s are invited to attend extended day sessions and participate in AIS classes. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? As per the NYSESLAT, these particular students are expanding in Listening and Speaking, but they are emerging in Reading and Writing. This student will require a variety of learning experiences to diagnose and remediate skills in Reading and Writing. The ESL teacher will concentrate on teaching word learning strategies that will include academic vocabulary as well as content area vocabulary. Teacher will integrate the Freyer model for teaching vocabulary and use context to unlock the meanings of unknown words, cognates, prefixes, suffixes, roots, dictionary and related reference tools. Teacher will also provide opportunities for student discussions and conversations utilizing the learned vocabulary. Teacher will build schema by making connections to related words and concepts. Students are targeted for extended day services (100 minutes per week), where their individual deficiencies are addressed according to their assessments. They are grouped homogeneously based on their grade and NYSESLAT Modality level. 4  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELLS who are identified as having special needs are serviced as per their individualized educational plan (IEP). The Assistant Principal of ELLs meets with the IEP teacher to discuss the student's mandated services as per their IEP. The collaborative meeting is to ensure that school is in compliance with IEP mandates as well as CR Part 154 mandates. As a result of reviewing both the IEP and NYSESLAT results, decisions are made as to whether students are placed in IEP classes and pulled for ESL services or placed in ESL classes and pulled for IEP services. Students who are placed in Self Contained, CollaborativeTeam Teaching or Resource classes are pulled 180 minutes per week for ESL services by an ESL certified teacher who differentiates considering learning styles and ESL methodologies. Teachers use instructional strategies that enable them to master skills necessary to function academically in order to be transitioned into mainstream classes. Students are pulled for Academic Intervention Services two times per week(90 minutes) where individual learning portfolios are developed and students receive an individualized instructional plan based on performance task assessments. Time For Kids Exploring Writing Curriculum is used in extended day and AIS to help students learn to write across content areas. This program uses standards based activities to develop writing skills in all important areas of writing: preparatory writing tasks, drafting, peer response, editing, revision, and publication.If all available intervention services are exhausted and are of no avail, the Assistant Principal of ELLS/ELL Coordinator communicates development to SBST. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Academic Intervention Services (AIS) is offered 2-3 times a week during the school day as an elective class for ELL’s. The teachers providing (AIS) services use data to inform the instruction they deliver to the students, focusing on building literacy skills and mathematical conceptual understanding. The AIS team meets twice a month to discuss students’ progress and plan appropriate academic interventions. The ESL coordinator, 2 ELL teachers and the AP in charge of ESL are members of the AIS team. The AIS team analyzes the standardized test scores, teacher generated assessments, grade wide performance tasks, attendance rates, periodic assessments such as ACUITY, report card grades, are examined to determine progress, areas of strength, and areas in need of improvement. Technology is used as a vehicle to deliver visual, auditory and academically rigorous instruction to ELL’s. Teachers of ELL’s use ipads, Lap tops, smart boards, listening stations, elmos, cameras and computers to enhance learning experiences for ELL’s and to ensure ELL’s are building the technological skills necessary to become 21st century leaders. AIS is delivered in English for Free Standing ESL students with Native Language supports. For TBE ESL students AIS is delivered in English/Spanish or English/Bangla as these classes are taught by their Bilingual teachers. Saturday Academy is a 14 week, 3 hour program geared at preparing ELL students for the NYS/NYSSELAT Exams. All ELL's are invited and encouraged to attend Saturday Academy. ESL and TBE teachers provide instruction for Saturday Academy to provide the highest quality of instuction and encouragement for ENL's. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the beginning of the year we attempted to mix ENL classes across home languages and cultures and group them according to proficiency levels but it caused many programming issues and we had to abandon the idea. At the end of the year we will re-evaluate our resources again and consider this change. Due to this year’s increase in beginning proficiency level ELL’s, we are looking into new professional development trainings for teachers that target instructional strategies for new comers. We are in the process of reviewing several different text and computer based programs in hopes of finding more targeted (according to ELL sub-groups and content areas) and appropriate material for our students. We are looking into hiring a Bengali guidance counselor to help meets the needs of our grouping population. We are seeking to find assessment tools that assess early literacy skills of our Bangla ELL's, Hatitan ELL's, Arabic ELL's and Urdu ELL's. Two of our teachers in the Bilingual Bangla program have also been accepted to the Funds for Teachers fellowship. This fellowship will allow them to become familiar with the curriculum and resources of prestigious English Medium schools in Malaysia and Bangladesh. They will visit the county of the students they teach and bring back authentic resources from prestigious English Medium schools in their own country (Bangladesh) and a country well known for it’s English Medium resources (Malaysia), and use those to help motivate and inspire those students that are able to read and write in their native language but are slowly working their way up to transitioning out of their native language instruction. For students who are unable to read or write in their native language, this will allow these teachers to experience what it’s like to face that same frustration as their students do when they know and see that the Bengali alphabet is entirely different than the English 5  alphabet, and what they can do to make that learning easier and more effective. These teahers will also learn how to read and write the language and gain intermediate proficiency so that they can, at the very least, translate some of the curriculum on our own in Bangla so that they can be used as scaffolds to help motivate those students that are trying so hard but need those translated prods to help them jump to the skies. This will also help our teachers communicate with their students' parents through writing when meetings in person are not possible to build stronger family and community ties. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have a Bilingual Arabic program this school year (2016-2017), however we will not be having it next year due to the shortage of students due to graduation, ENLs testing out etc. If however we see that we have Arabic speaking students coming in September and we have enough students to start a class, then we will be prepared to have an Arabic Bilingual program in the upcoming school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students are entitled to and invited to all extracurricular and support services that we offer to the entire body. This includes extended day, Friday School, Saturday Academy, NYSESLAT Test Prep Classes and our Champions after school extracurricular and tutorial programs. It also includes our extensive Elective program,where students get to choose from a menu of enrichment classes. Two of the choices are Fine Arts and Vocal music, which are taught using the Blueprint for Arts Model. Translated information letters, permission slips, emails and phone calls are made in the students’ home languages facilitated by the ESL department and Bilingual Parent Coordinator. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Strategies used in the ELL classrooms are: SIOP and QTEL instructional strategies, activating and bridging prior knowledge through using graphic organizers, anticipatory guides, semantic maps, think-pair-share, turn and talks, stop and jots, language partners, KWL charts, etc., contextualization such as, metaphors, pictures, audio and video clips, newspapers, magazines, etc., and building schema by bridging prior knowledge and experiences to new concepts and ideas. We place all incoming ELL students in an age appropriate grade. We follow the NYS Common Core Learning Standards during instruction in the content areas. Music and Art teachers use the NYC Blue Prints for the Arts curriculum which is by grade level. We use Visions, Rosetta Stone, Imagination Learning, NYSESLAT Test Prep 1-3, CMP3 Spanish, Native Language Libraries, Glossaries and the technology previously listed to help support ELL’s academic success. We also have students that are advanced in their native language make scaffolds for their peers. Beginner students are able to use these language materials written in student-friendly language as supports for understanding lessons being taught. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is always at the minimum of 25% in Freestanding ESL classes and varies in TBE classes according to students’ proficiency levels and individual needs (See Section A, question #4 for a detailed description of NL instructional percentages). All ELL students were provided with glossaries in their native languages. We were able to order books for classroom libraries in the native languages of all of our ESL students. Teachers use translation software to translate curriculum material and assessments as needed for students. Students use technology to translate for themselves materials as needed. Students and teachers utilize computers to show instructional videos and tutorials in students’ native language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Here at MS127, we understand the developmental need for adolescents to learn amongst peers of their age. Thus, we place ELL’s in their age/grade appropriate class. Classes were created based on grade and are heterogeneously group according to proficiency levels. Books for classroom libraries were specifically ordered in English and Native Languages and are age appropriate regardless of students’ proficiency. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 6  Strategies used at MS 127 in the ELL classrooms are: SIOP and QTEL instructional strategies, activating and bridging prior knowledge through using graphic organizers, anticipatory guides, semantic maps, think-pair-share, turn and talks, stop and jots, language partners, KWL charts, etc., contextualization such as, metaphors, pictures, audio and video clips, newspapers, magazines, etc., and building schema by bridging prior knowledge and experiences to new concepts and ideas. We place all incoming ELL students in an age appropriate grade. We follow the NYS Common Core Learning Standards during instruction in the content areas. Music and Art teachers use the NYC Blue Prints for the Arts curriculum which is by grade level. We use Visions, Rosetta Stone, Imagination Learning, NYSESLAT Test Prep 1-3, CMP3 Spanish, Native Language Libraries, Glossaries and the technology previously listed to help support ELL’s academic success. We will collaborate professionally with X567 to support their programs in support of students as learning partners. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). MS 127 has a voluntary summer school academy for ELL’s. All ELL’s are invited to attend but emphasis is placed on Beginning level ELL’s and newcomers. Instruction is geared towards English Literacy and mathematics. Summer School Academy is a great way to connect new comers with the content before the academic year starts. It gives students important opportunities to build relationships with peers and introduces to the new structures of school in the United States. New ELL’s who enroll in throughout the school year are paired with a student buddy to help ease their transition. Whenever possible students are chosen who speak the same language and are within the same age range for their grade. Parent workshops are held throughout the year for the families of new ELL’s to help orient families into our learning community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? LanguageNone. We have one Foreign Language teacher who teaches Spanish to Non-Ell's. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Teachers of ELLS meet weekly in professional learning communities with the ELL Coordinator, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, PIC’s and Lead Teachers during TM (teacher meeting time) to ensure effective implementation of best practices. TM was developed to provide a forum for teachers to share best practices and strategies, discuss and evaluate the assessment cycle, documentation/ creation of goals, progress of targeted ELL students, data analysis, share successes and challenges in teaching and providing services for ELL’s. ELL teachers use this time to collaboratively plan their instruction and make adjustments according to data and student’s needs. This meeting and the bi-weekly ELL meetings are places where teachers can discuss and turn-key strategies they have learned from LSO workshops, QTEL, NYC ELL Institute, Theater For A New Audience, Smartboard training, and Classroom inter-visitations and any other formal Professional Development Workshops they have attended. Two hours of per session is available per week for collaborative lesson planning for the ESL department. The department has 90% of its members participating in Collaborative Lesson Planning. This year the ESL department is participating in Instructional 7  Rounds. Teachers use this non-threatening environment as a way to evaluate their practice, gain competency in Danielson, CCLS curriculum and ESL instructional strategies.PD is given bi-monthly at ESL meetings by administrators, coaches and teachers in Lesson planning CCLS aligned, ESL instruction. Monthly Learns are also given by the above on Lesson development, rigor, engagement, differentiation, content specific strategies and content development. Teachers plan together at weekly teacher meetings by grade and department and per session is offered for common planning which many teachers utilize (90%) of the ESL department meets weekly for common planning. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. PD is given bi-monthly at ESL meetings by administrators, coaches and teachers in Lesson planning CCLS aligned ESL instruction. Monthly Learns are also given by the above on Lesson development, rigor, engagement, differentiation, content specific strategies and content development. Teachers plan together at weekly teacher meetings by grade and department and per session is offered for common planning which many teachers utilize (90%) of the ESL department meets weekly for common planning. PD hours are met through our bi monthly meetings as well as network training workshops planned for the winter and spring. Teachers are in the process of researching PD’s that they feel will be most valuable to improving their practice. School Wide PD for ELL instruction will take place in December. It will be given by the AP of ELL’s, the ELL coordinator and 4 ESL/Bilingual certified teachers. All workshop materials and signature sheets or time sheets are kept in the ESL Compliance binder with a summary sheet with cumulative hours for each teacher of ELLS. 5 ELL teachers, the ELL Coordinator and the ELL Assistant Principal have attended Network/DOE sponsored training in October, 2015. Every month ELL teachers are forwarded the OELL email where various professional developments can be found. At our bi-monthly meeting new PD’s are discussed and teachers are encouraged to attend. In assisting students with the transition to high school and focus on college and career readiness, 8th grade ELL’s visited an ELL High School (New World High School) in October where they took a tour and met with students to discuss their high school experience. We plan to take all ELL’s on similar visits to high schools and colleges alike as our school continues to focus on College and Career Readiness. An AUSSIE Literacy Consultant has been hired and continues to work with the ELA/ELL staff to improve their instruction. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Involving the ELL parent begins at registration. The parent is introduced to the ELL program used by our school by the Assistant Principal (Mrs. Brooks), Parent Coordinator ( MS. Tejeda), and ELL Coordinator (Ms. Guistino). The ELL parent orientation video is shown at the time of registration, in the native language of the parent. Two weeks into school an ELL parent breakfast and an ELL parent dinner is held to introduce the family to our ELL department which include teachers and administrators. We have conducted our Parent Workshops; Science Night, Skedula, What is the NYSESLAT?, Math in the content area, the High School Process workshops in the native language of our parents (Spanish & Bengla). This school year we have an ELL Department event (Cultural Celebration) which included performances by our ELL students, teachers, local artist, and a potluck style food sharing and Spring Festival. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL Parent involvement is not optimal. We are reaching out to our TBE classes to obtain class parents to try and increase engagement besides the normal invitations to school events. 8  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Harry Sherman, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Harry Sherman Title Principal Jennifer Brooks Assistant Principal Isa Tejeda Parent Coordinator Bella Giustino ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Sabrin Abedin Teacher/Subject Area Abdul Hafiz David Soares Yina Mercado Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Elida Espinal School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Samsun Nahar Other Teacher Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 10/30/17 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X127 School Name: The Castle Hill Middle School 127 Superintendent: Ms. Ross Porter The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Bella Giustino Teacher - Regular Grades Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to asses our schools' written translation and oral interpretation needs we cross reference various sources of information in order to ensure accurate data and facilitate parental involvement while providing families with appropriate and timely information in a language that they can understand. We gather information on families Home Language, preferred language for written communication and preferred language for oral communication by reviewing information from: the Home Language Survey, Students Emergency Contact Cards, SIFE Assessments, Student Interviews given by the ESL teacher, ATS reports: HLIS & DNLO and the Social and Family History Interview Survey we give to families at the first ELL Parent Orientation in September. The ESL Coordinator and the ESL Team cross reference the above data to ensure we have correctly identified each student’s families' oral and written interpretation needs. We then record each families’ oral and written interpretation needs in the ESL Binder and on our school based ELL Tracking device, the Individualized English Language Learners Plan. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language ALBANIAN ARABIC BENGALI (BANGLA IN BANGLADES CHINESE ANY FULANI HAITIAN CREOLE KOREAN MANDINKA (AKA MANDINGO) MANDARIN ENGLISH STUDENT DOES NOT SPEAK PILIPINO (A.K.A. TAGALOG) SPANISH SERI (AMERICAN) SIGN LANGUAGE TAMIL URDU VIETNAMESE WOLOF Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 4 22 232 5 1 2 1 1 0 683 2 1 166 1 0 1 3 1 6 0.35 1.94 20.49 0.44 0.09 0.18 0.09 0.09 0 60.34 0.18 0.09 14.66 0.09 0 0.09 0.27 0.09 0.53 4 22 241 4 1 2 1 1 1 671 2 1 167 1 2 1 3 1 6 0.35 1.94 21.29 0.35 0.09 0.18 0.09 0.09 0.09 59.28 0.18 0.09 14.75 0.09 0.18 0.09 0.27 0.09 0.53 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Bengali, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure 3  Monthly School Calendars Sep/Oct/Nov/Dec/Jan/Feb/ Mar/April/May/June Quarterly Progress Reports Oct/Dec/Mar/May Quarterly Report Cards Oct/Jan/Mar/May Monthly Attendance Letters Sep/Oct/Nov/Dec/Jan/Feb/ Mar/April/May/June Annual School Handbooks and Student Contracts September Yearly and Monthly Subject Syllabi September timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly school calendars are sent home with students and are available for pickup at the actual school as well. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. We use data and information from our online grading system called, "Skedula" to collect and organize information for parents' utilization. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. Letters are translated and sent home to keep parents informed about pertinent information involving school attendance importance. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. Handbooks are translated depending on the home language and distributed at the start of the school year. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. Each department is responsible for translating and distributing subject syllabi to parents so that they are kept well informed of what is going to be taught, which includes highlighted expectations for the school year. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation 4  Monthly Parent News Letters Sep/Oct/Nov/Dec/Jan/Feb/ Mar/April/May/June Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements Oct/Jan/Mar/May After School Program Information September New York State and Citywide Testing Dates and Information September/March Skedula Information September Grade Activities Information Sep/Oct/Nov/Dec/Jan/Feb/ Mar/April/May/June software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. Monthly parent letters are translated and sent home. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. Letters to be sent home informing parents and guardians about after school programs are also translated into their home language. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. Activities such as the senior trip, state assessments, spirit week, and grade trips are highlighted in information that is also translated for parents. We use DOE templates for covered languages; we use school-based personnel, translation software, and online sites for non-covered languages when needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 5  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings ELL Parent Orientation Night September Parent Workshops Sep/Nove/Jan/Mar/ May Parent Teacher Conferences Nov/Jan/Mar/May Parent Outreach Time Sep/Oct/Nov/Dec/Jan/Feb/Mar/Apr/May/Jun How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our first formal face-to face meeting with families is the ELL Parent Orientation Night in September. The Parent Coordinator distributes a PD Interest Survey at The ELL Parent Orientation.. Surveys are translated into Bangla, Spanish, Arabic and Creole and information from these surveys guides our professional development seminar choices for parents. We offer several parent/guardian workshops throughout the year. Topics vary according to Families needs and their choices. Parents and guardians obtain the opportunity to engage in learning and input activities to further drive instruction in the school and to further obtain an understanding as to how communication with their child(ren) at home plays a role in language acquisition learning. Parent Teacher conferences occur four times a year once each marking period. Any imperative information like state assessments, high school applications, prospective curriculum units to be covered throughout the year, and future major student projects/investigations. The Parent Coordinator distributes a PD Interest Survey at all four Parent Teacher Conferences. Surveys are translated into Bangla, Spanish, Arabic and Creole and information from these surveys guides our PD choices for parents. Teachers make phone calls to parents, hold private and targeted parent meetings and workshops individually as well as in groups every Tuesday during DOE mandated Parent Outreach time after the instructional day. Parents can meet teachers in their classrooms to meet and engage in meaningful conversations and 6  planning. These sessions are collaboratively planned at weekly grade meetings and the bi-weekly ESL meetings. At times a groups of teachers can meet with parents so that parents obtain a more clear vision and understanding of curriculum and teacher teams. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Stakeholders from our school who can speak the home language of the family will be responsible for quickly reaching out. They are to use student emergency contact cards as well. Stakeholders can also utilize the NYCDOE Intranet site to aid in translation support, especially for over-the-phone interpretation instructions. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school's language Access Coordinator will facilitate, participate, organize, and turnkey any valuable information to stakeholders and the ESL department. The leader of the ESL department and assistant principal Ms. Jennifer Brooks, the Language Access Coordinator Ms. Bella Giustino, and staff members of the school ESL department will be responsible for training on policies and procedures. Language Access Coordinator will turnkey training on language access procedures to ESL department and the rest of the staff at the school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Fulfilling Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663: Our school will provide Limited English Speaking parents a meaningful opportunity to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education. Our school will determine within 30 days of a student’s enrollment, the primary language spoken by the parent of each student enrolled in the school. Information will be maintained in ATS and on student Emergency Cards as well as the ESL compliance binder. Our school will provide translation and interpretation services to parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively. Parents may rely on adults or relatives for language interpretation if they choose. Our school will assess timely provision of translated documents through existing resources or the DOE Translation Unit. Upon initial enrollment, through Parent Orientation meetings in September, 7  back packed notice in October, Parent Teacher Conferences in November and February and in our Monthly School Calendar/Newsletter, parents are notified of the translation services available at MS 127. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our schools uses information gathered by the School Survey, informal reporting from the Parent Teacher Association, parents and students, the Parent Suggestion Box as well as four quality assurance parent surveys given by our Parent Coordinator at each Parent Teacher Conference. We also distribute professional development, Family Needs Interest Surveys, and three events geared towards families of English Language Learners. The events take place in September, December and April. We use this data to plan and implement family driven PD and services. These events range from Parent Orientation Night, several parent workshops, and even during parent outreach times. 8 
