2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X154 School Name: P.S. 154 JONATHAN D. HYATT Principal: ALISON COVIELLO 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P.S. 154 – Jonathan D. Hyatt 07X154 320700010154 PK - 5 School Number (DBN): 333 East 135 th Street Bronx, NY 10454 718-292-4742 718-292-4721 Phone Number: Alison Coviello Fax: acoviello@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: HadylaMendez Alison Coviello Nathali Rosado ShaniquaDunne Alison Coviello TaishaPantojas To be determined To be determined District Information Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue ralvarez@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-742-6500, ext. 1 718-742-6548 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Alison Coviello Nathali Rosado ShaniquaDunne Sonia Martinez TaishaPantojas HadylaMendez Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Hope Bell Jennifer Nazario Diana Rosario SuhadMohamed-Shehata Maria Campbell Ruth Escobar Stephanie Henderson X X X X X X X Parent Parent Parent Parent Teacher Teacher Teacher Teacher YMCARepresentative City Year Representative Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. P.S. 154 currently services students in PK – 5 th grade. Fifty-five percent of our students are Hispanic, and 42% of our students are Black. Approximately 98% percent of our students are eligible for free lunch. Twelve percent of our students are English Language Learners. Of this 12%, thirteen percent also have IEPs. Twenty-three percent of our students are classified as students with disabilities. Sixty-four percent of the students at P.S. 154 with IEPs are in ICT classes, 6% receive SETSS, 14% receive multiple services, and 16% receive related services only. percent of our students are living in temporary housing. As outlined in the Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools. providing rigorous instruction requires an in-depth understanding of where students are, multiple strategies to modify and adapt while maintaining inclusiveness of all learners, and high, standards-based expectations. To this end, we believe that great instruction begins with high level planning and preparation. At P.S. 154, planning and preparation prioritize the following elements: 1) clear, teacher-facing articulation of the learning objective(s) for the lesson, small group, conference, or unit; 2) a clear, student-facing teaching point that details the what and the how; 3) a learning plan that is fully aligned to the stated learning objective; 4) constant assessment (both informal and formal) of whether students are meeting the pre-defined learning objective(s); and 5) revision, as necessary, to plans and practice to ensure that students meet the defined learning objective(s). Pedagogically, we believe that students learn best when: 1) skills and strategies are explicitly modeled; 2) instructions are clear; 3) big ideas and concepts are uncovered by students through a process of doing and discussion; 4) supports that enable greater student independence are provided; 5) small group instruction and individual conferences are deliberate and targeted; and 6) there is consistency across classrooms both within and across grades in strategies taught, pedagogical practices, and classroom structures. In addition to the beliefs about teaching and learning that are described above, our staff collectively believes in the imperative that our students read at or above grade level standards so that they may fully engage in rigorous intellectual tasks across all content areas and be prepared to participate meaningfully in college and careers. We believe that increasing students’ reading achievement occurs when students are independent thinkers and learners, know themselves as learners, have a passion for literacy; and when our instruction is rooted in purposeful and consistent data analysis; deliberate differentiation for individuals and small groups; and high-leverage intervention. Through dedication to this shared belief and practice, students at P.S. 154 have continuously made gains toward closing the achievement gap. Proficiency levels on the New York State English Language Arts assessment have steadily risen over the past five years from 5.3% proficiency in Spring 2013 to 44.2% proficiency in Spring 2018. Moreover, the percent of P.S. 154 students scoring far below grade level on the New York State English Language Arts assessment has decreased steadily over time, dropping from 57.3% of students scoring Level 1 (far below grade level) in Spring 2013 to 21.5% of students scoring Level 1 in Spring 2017. Staff members at P.S. 154 are committed to this forward trajectory. As evidenced in the data above, teachers' explicit instruction and deliberate differentiation coupled with consistent data analysis to inform small group and individualized instruction have resulted in positive gains in literacy. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  A similar positive trajectory over time is evident in mathematics. From Spring 2013 to Spring 2017, the percent of P.S. 154 students scoring proficient on the New York State math assessment has risen from just 2.7% in Spring 2013 to 38.0% in Spring 2018. Furthermore, the percent of students scoring Level 1 (far below grade level) in mathematics has decreased from 68% in Spring 2013 to 32.5% in Spring 2018. Our 2016 - 2017 Quality Review instructional core ratings reflect our commitment to academic excellence and forward progress as it pertains to the teaching and learning that occurs inside all of our classrooms. Our instructional core indicators were rated as follows during Spring 2017: 1.1 (Curriculum): Well-developed; 1.2 (Pedagogy): Well-developed; 2.2 (Assessment): Proficient. As a Responsive Classroom school, P.S. 154 works hard to foster and maintain a safe, joyful, and challenging environment for children, staff, and families. We aspire to keep Responsive Classroom values and tenets at the forefront of all that we do in order to continue to build and maintain trust amongst all constituents. Our collaboratively developed shared vision and mission statements, updated collaboratively during Spring, Summer, and Fall 2017, speak to these values: Shared Vision P.S. 154 is a community of caring adults and children. We aspire to develop a joyful, safe, and academically challenging school where learning occurs through meaningful experiences and students are encouraged to be creative, thoughtful, critical, and independent. We seek a community where collaboration, honesty, cohesiveness, and optimism abound, high expectations are maintained by and for all, and new challenges are faced with grace. Mission Statement P.S. 154 is a community of Collaborative, Appreciative, Responsible, Empathetic, and Steadfast learners. Here, students gain the academic, social, and emotional foundations they will need to be highly successful in high school, college, and careers so that, ultimately, they may positively impact their communities. Over the past five years, P.S. 154 has grown significantly in the area of supportive environment; in fact, the school environment has transformed. In Spring 2012, just 13% of teachers responded affirmatively to the New York City School Environment Survey statement, “At my school, order and discipline are maintained." However, in Spring 2016, 97% of teachers responded with "Agree" or "Strongly Agree" to the same statement. P.S. 154 has transformed into a place where learning is valued and care and self-regulation are taught and modeled. As a staff, we believe that social emotional learning is as important as academic learning. We believe that our school culture is foundational; without a collaborative commitment to students' social and emotional well-being, neither high quality teaching nor high leverage learning can occur. Each year, we work together as a staff to determine appropriate focus questions to guide our school year. Following an analysis of our 2017 - 2018 academic data, whole school average teacher ratings for each rated component on the Danielson framework, attendance data, and the Spring 2018 School Environment Survey, we developed the following preliminary focus questions to guide us during the 2018 - 2019 school year: 1) How can we create even more consistency across all of our classrooms, including, but not limited to, our planning and preparation practices, our social emotional curriculum, our math classroom structures and assessment practices, and the language we use to teach key literacy skills, thereby increasing student achievement? 2) How can we ensure that the positive reinforcement we give students and parents outweighs the negative feedback they receive, thereby increasing student academic engagement and pro-social behavior? 3) How can we increase student excitement for learning? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  The 2017 - 2018 school year was the third year that P.S. 154 was able to provide an extra hour of learning time by way of the Extended Learning Time (ELT) hour. All Kindergarten - 5th grade students as well as the majority of Pre-Kindergarten students are present for this additional hour of learning time. All classrooms are teacher-led, and regular academic and intervention instruction occurs during this time, making for a seamless day with little to no difference between the regular academic day and the ELT hour. P.S. 154 also offers an expanded day for Kindergarten - 5th graders from 3:35 p.m.. - 5:35 p.m. Participating students engage in music instruction (including African drumming and voice), dance, drama, yoga, sports, and cooking during this time. Finally, forty Kindergarten, 1st, and 2nd graders receive one-to-one reading tutoring during this expanded day time through Read Alliance. Over the past five years, P.S. 154 has built productive partnerships with both the YMCA and City Year. Both organizations are a strong presence in our building during the regular school day and the expanded day. Y School staff members work in each Kindergarten, 1st, and 2nd grade classroom throughout the regular school day as teaching assistants, and City Year corps members work in each 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade classroom during the regular school day as teaching assistants. We believe that all adults should be viewed and utilized as valuable human resources. As such, CBO staff members work alongside teachers during the regular school day to engage students in targeted small-group or one-to-one instruction. Moreover, teachers actively share lesson plans and expect that Community Based Organization (CBO) members actively partake in the daily assessment process. Finally, in order to best serve and meet the needs of our students and their families, our work as a Community School has grown tremendously over the past three years. We offer a wide array of health and well-being services for students and families. These include a full-time, in-house mental health clinic; full, on-site dental services two times a year; vision services for all students; flu vaccinations; a fully operating food pantry; dedicated attendance mentoring for chronically absent students; full wrap-around services for up to eight families at a time; evening and summer GED and ESL classes; attendance parent workshops; and weekly parent workshops/resource opportunities. Because we firmly believe that the success of our students relates directly to the well-being of their families, we deem our community school model to be an essential element of our overall school plan. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X154 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 370 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 25 25 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 12 6 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 94.9% % Reduced Lunch 9.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 57.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.42 0% 24% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 44.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 70% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 42 93.5% 2.4% 21.6% 40.5% 0.3% 1.1% 2 0% 7.3 38.0% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X - X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Over the past three years, P.S. 154 has devoted significant professional learning time to developing our content knowledge around early literacy and planning for the most effective instruction for readers in Levels A - K (Fountas & Pinnell). As a result of this work, we have significantly increased the percent of students in 1st and 2nd grade who are reading on or above grade level. In June 2018, 46% of all 1st graders and 56% of all 2nd graders were reading on or above grade level. The yearly increases in reading proficiency in the early grades have also resulted in positive results in grade 3. In June 2018, 60% of third graders were reading on or above grade level. In addition to our improved classroom literacy instruction, we have implemented a robust literacy intervention plan. This work begins with a highly functioning Child Study Team that meets regularly to discuss students in need of tiered interventions within the RtI model. Students' data is closely tracked and monitored in order to make informed decisions about the type of interventions, intensity, and frequency students will have in order to address the need. Intervention programs currently being used to support the students reading far below or below grade level are: Reading Rescue, Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI), Reading Recovery, Explode the Code, and intense guided reading and strategy groups. The Child Study Team (CST) is comprised of the school's assistant principal, guidance counselor, behavior interventionist, IEP teacher, a general education and reading intervention teacher, and the school psychologist. For the past two years, P.S. 154 has devoted significant professional learning time to developing consistent instructional practices and structures as well as assessment tools across our Kindergarten, 1st, and 2nd grade classrooms in mathematics. We worked closely with our Metamorphosis staff developer to increase teacher content knowledge in numeracy, aligning instructional practices and structures in math, as well as aligning our assessment practices across these three early grades. During the 2018 - 2019 school year, our professional learning in mathematics will focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  primarily on our 3rd, 4th, and 5th grades. Given our departmentalized model in the upper grades, this will be intensive professional learning work with our three math content area teachers and our four upper grade Differentiation Specialists (special education teachers). Work with these teachers will include content knowledge development as it relates to numeracy, instructional practice and structural alignment, and assessment development and alignment. 2017 - 2018 math data shows an overall increase in question proficiency from 49% in 2016 - 2017 to 52% in 2017 - 2018. The 2017 - 2018 third grade cohort saw a significant increase in question proficiency, increasing from 48% in 2016 - 2017 to 61% in 2017 - 2018. While the question proficiency of the 2017 - 2018 fifth grade cohort increased slightly as compared to the 2016 - 2017 fifth grade cohort (45% to 49%), the question proficiency of the 2017 - 2018 fourth grade cohort decreased as compared to the 2016 - 2017 fourth grade cohort (55% - 47%). Math test score data shows that 56% of 3rd graders scored Levels 3 and 4 on the Spring 2018 NYS math test, while just 26.2% of 4th graders and 33.9% of 5th graders scored Levels 3 and 4 on the Spring 2018 NYS math test. The priority needs that will be addressed with this goal and action plan are our continued development of coherent mathematics instruction across K - 5th grades, with a strong emphasis on the 4th and 5th grades. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? As elucidated in the School Narrative (see above), P.S. 154 educators believe that skills and strategies must be modeled; instructions must be clear and explicit; more time must be devoted to student “doing” and less time spent on teacher talk; and strategies must be utilized to engage all learners, regardless of their present level of performance, in accessible, meaningful, and appropriately rigorous academic work. We also focus significantly on the process of learning and use the data gathered, assessed, and analyzed throughout the process to identify actionable next steps and targeted small groups. In addition to the beliefs about teaching and learning that are described above, our staff collectively believes in the imperative that our students read at or above grade level standards so that they may fully engage in rigorous intellectual tasks across all content areas and be prepared to participate meaningfully in college and careers. We believe that increasing students’ reading achievement occurs when students are independent thinkers and learners, know themselves as learners, have a passion for literacy; and when our instruction is rooted in purposeful and consistent data analysis; deliberate differentiation for individuals and small groups; and high-leverage intervention. P.S. 154 relies largely upon a labsite model of professional learning. In this way, the ideas we discuss are rooted in actual classroom practice. Listed below is our comprehensive professional learning plan. Labsite days run by TCRWP coaches Labsite days run by Metamorphosis coach    Model classroom intervisitations  Collaborative walks   Professional learning cycles  Weekly announcement highlights section Inquiry cycles with built-in intervisitations We evaluate the impact of professional learning through regular classroom observations, student work analyses, and staff surveys. How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  P.S. 154 currently has a rigorous and coherent curriculum in each subject area that is aligned across grades and designed to meet the particular needs of all students. P.S. 154 utilizes the following Tier I curricular programs in literacy:  TCRWP units of study in reading and writing (K - 5th);  TCRWP units of study in phonics (K - 1st);  Recipe for Reading (individualized groups based on spelling assessments) (2);  Preventing Academic Failure Handwriting (K - 5);     School-created grammar curriculum (1 - 3); Sadlier grammar (4 - 5); School-created shared reading curriculum (3 - 5); School-created read aloud curriculum (3 - 5) P.S. 154 utilizes the following Tier II and Tier III interventions in literacy:  Reading Recovery (Tier III - one-to-one intervention that occurs daily for 30 minutes per day; conducted by trained Reading Recovery teachers)  Reading Rescue (Tier III - one-to-one intervention that occurs daily for 30 minutes per day; conducted by trained  paraprofessionals and CBO staff members) Leveled Literacy Intervention (Tier II - small group intervention that occurs daily for 30 minutes per day; conducted by reading intervention teachers)  Explode the Code Phonics (Tier II - small group intervention that occurs daily for 30 minutes per day; conducted by teachers, paraprofessionals, or CBO staff)  Double dose guided reading (Tier II - small group intervention that occurs daily for 30 minutes per day; conducted by reading intervention teachers)  Read Alliance (Tier III - one-to-one intervention that occurs three times a week for 45 minutes per day; conducted by trained high school tutors) P.S. 154 utilizes the following Tier 1 curricular programs in mathematics:  Contexts for Learning units of study in math (K - 5);  Go Math units of study (K - 5) P.S. 154 utilizes the following school wide assessments to monitor and measure student growth: Staff-created grammar assessments (every two weeks) (1 - 3); Fountas & Pinnell reading assessments (September, January, June) (K - 5);   High Frequency Word assessments (November, January, March, June) (K - 5);  Words Their Way Spelling assessment (June) (K - 4);   Ready NY written assessments (3 - 5);   Math interviews (September, January, June) (K - 2);  iReady assessments (September, January, June); Fact fluency assessments (1 - 5) Parents/guardians receive grade updates four times a year (November - report cards; January - progress reports; March - report cards; June - report cards). P.S. 154 has a strong and coherent social studies curriculum in grades 3 – 5. Content learning is integrated throughout the full year with non-fiction units of study in reading and writing through a departmentalized model and utilizing the NYC Social Studies Scope and Sequence. In grades, K – 2, P.S. 154 conducts units of study using the NYC Social Studies 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  Scope and Sequence and corresponding units of study. P.S. 154 ends every school year with a school wide Social Studies fair during which students present their content knowledge and understanding of big ideas in the social studies. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? P.S. 154 has programmed our students who were previously programmed in self-contained 12:1 classes with multiple services. These students will spend the majority of their time in ICT while also receiving some periods of 12:1 instruction. Moreover, students in the lower grades who have IEPs and are functioning far below grade level academically are also programmed for multiple services rather than a self-contained special education class. Our purpose in doing this is to intentionally provide all of our students access to rigorous instruction and peers whose academic functioning is closer to grade level. All of our students receive differentiated small group or one-to-one instruction during and outside of class based upon their needs and strengths. We take a whole school approach to intervention, considering the needs and strengths of all students rather than just those who are classified as students with disabilities and English Language Learners. In mathematics, specifically, students in grades 3 - 5 engage in shared math every other week outside of the regular math class. These tasks mirror New York State math assessment questions, with a focus on open-ended problem-solving. In-class, small-group and one-to-one work is conducted according to student understanding, and tasks are differentiated to support and push students at different levels of proficiency. Finally, stations within the math classroom allow for fluency practice as well as engagement with high level, cognitively demanding problem-solving. As for a formal connection to college awareness, P.S. 154 works to take every 1st - 5th grader to visit a college each school year. Finally, P.S. 154 has an expanded day program where students are exposed to a multitude of enrichment experiences where they can cultivate interests, skill-sets, and talent (e.g. musical instrument instruction [drumming], cooking, theater, dance, sports, and yoga). Research shows that these types of diverse experiences are crucial to expanding students' perspectives of the world. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? At its heart, culturally responsive pedagogy is about ensuring that expectations are high and instruction is rigorous for all students (Ladson-Billings, 1994). Moreover, culturally responsive pedagogy calls for student-centered instruction that is grounded in relevant contexts and is inquiry-based (Darling-Hammond, 1997). This school year, we are adding an experiential Environmental Curriculum for all Kindergarten - 5th grade students. While this curriculum is just taking root and will develop to its fullest capacity over 2 - 3 years, our goal is to provide students with Bronx-based outdoor experiences that allow them opportunities to understand and grapple with information and environmental problems first-hand. The environmental curriculum centers on the Next Generation environmental science standards and relies upon outdoor, nature-based trips for the majority of student learning. Every grade focuses on one theme with 2 - 5 related essential questions for the school year. The themes are as follows: Kindergarten: Plants, Trees, Forests 1st Grade: Plant and Animal Survival 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  2nd Grade: Rivers, Ponds, and Marshes 3rd Grade: Birds 4th Grade: Native American Use of the Natural World to Survive 5th Grade: Interdependent Relationships in the Natural Environment: Human Impact Darling-Hammond, L. (1997). The right to learn: A blueprint for creating schools that work. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. Ladson-Billings, G. (1994). Dreamkeepers. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Teachers will continue to receive high quality professional development through specific and individualized coaching from our TCRWP and Metamorphosis staff developers. During the 2018 - 2019 school year, the focus for professional learning will be on ongoing assessment practices. Coaches will discuss, model, and assess strategies used in classes across grades K-5 for teaching strong reading and writing habits of mind, building reading and writing stamina across learners, targeting lagging skills through guided reading, shared reading, and specific and flexible strategy groups, facilitating inquiry through scaffolded and higher ordered questions. Moreover, coaches will model purposeful questioning and conferring followed by the process of how to make deliberate and purposeful decisions around students’ next steps. Additionally, teachers will use student data that has been analyzed to develop targeted small groups based on need and readiness level. Teachers will work closely with the YMCA counselors (K-2) and CY Corp members (3-5) to provide facilitated small group and individualized learning experiences to students. Two school-based teams will continue to work on monitoring both student progress and the effectiveness of current academic programs provided for students. The Child Study Team (CST) will meet on a regular basis to identify targeted students at-risk of academic failure to provide tiered interventions and monitor the progress of these students in order to make informed decisions about the academic programs being offered to them. Tiered interventions provided are LLI, Reading Rescue, Read Alliance, Reading Recovery, Explode the Code phonics, and intense guided reading groups and strategy groups for students reading far below grade level. The School Implementation Team (SIT) will closely monitor the progress of students already receiving special education services to determine student progress as measured by their IEP annual goals and grade-based standards. The SIT will devise flexible programs for students in order to meet their individual needs and maintain a level of productive struggle in LREs. The SIT will track and monitor the progress of students with flexible programs as well the quality of the programs outlined in students’ IEPs to ensure that all students with disabilities are provided access to the general education curriculum in the most appropriate LRE. The SIT is comprised of the school’s assistant principal, guidance counselor, behavior interventionist, IEP teacher, a general education teacher, ESL teacher, and speech provider. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Professional learning targets grade level and individual teachers' needs. As an administrative team, we regularly review teacher observation data to ascertain teachers' most pressing and high-leverage growth areas. Combining this knowledge with the work that is regularly done during our staff-developer led labsite days, we customize our labsite days, classroom intervisitations, and professional learning cycles. Part 3 – Annual Goal 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, the average math proficiency rating will meet or exceed 2.67. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Rigorous Instruction Average Math Proficiency Rating 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Students in Kindergarten - 5th grade with an emphasis on those in 3rd - 5th grade. Framework: Rigorous Instruction Average Math proficiency Professional Learning: Metamorphosis Teaching Learning Communities Math Inquiry and Standards Unpacking Framework: Rigorous Instruction Average Math proficiency Numeracy Math Intervention: Focused on Multiplication and Fractions Students in Kindergarten - 5th grade with an emphasis on those in 3rd - 5th grade. Students in 4th - 5th grade who demonstrate weakness in related standards. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrative team; outside staff developer; math teachers Administrative team; math teachers September 2018 - June 2019; 12 coaching days with primary focus on teachers in grades 3 - 5 October 2018 - June 2019; Meetings occur every other week How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Percent of students mastering key number sense standards as measured by standards-based assessments. Percent of students mastering key number sense standards as measured by standards-based assessments. Success rate on pre- and post-intervention cycle standards-focused assessments for students participating in intervention groups for 6 week cycles. Framework: Rigorous Instruction January 2019 - June 2019 Average Math proficiency Administration; Metamorphosis staff developer; City Year Program Director and Team Leader; Classroom teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. After consultation with the School Leadership Team, P.S. 154 is going to involve parents in the development of math work in the following ways: 1. Initial math parent workshop to introduce parents to our beliefs about the teaching and learning of math (November 2018) 2. Math classroom walks in K - 2 classrooms for parents (January 2019) 3. Series of Instagram math instructional videos for parents of 3rd - 5th graders (February 2019 - May 2019) Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Human Resources:  Metamorphosis staff developer  Administrators - inquiry facilitation, observation feedback, monitoring of assessment data  Math teachers  Intervention staff (CBO) Financial Resources  Pro rata funding for teachers, paraprofessionals, and interventionists to work the ELT hour  Per session funding for teachers, guidance counselors, and AP to work the ELT hour, Saturday Academies, and Vacation Academies as well as for paraprofessionals to conduct intervention small group work  Per diem funding for substitutes (inclusive of substitutes to be used during in-school professional learning time)  Missed prep funding to pay teachers for professional learning time that occurs during preparation periods  Metamorphosis professional development services Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. At a February 2019 school-based data checkpoint, interim standards-based assessment data will demonstrate mastery of already taught grade level power standards at a rate not lower than 50% of each grade. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  We will administer standards-specific multiple choice and open-ended question assessments to students in grades 3 - 5 beginning in January. Assessments will measure students' proficiency with already taught grade-level power standards. Pre-assessments will be given to all students in the grade. A two-week cycle of intervention will follow each pre-assessment. Then, a post-assessment will be given to students who performed below level 4 on the pre-assessment. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? P.S. 154 has transformed its school culture by fully immersing itself in Responsive Classroom values and ideals. We work to collectively understand our children as individuals who need confidence and a sense of belonging and with whom self-regulation is the aim. Yearly Responsive Classroom summer institutes for the large majority of staff members in our community provide us with shared knowledge and understanding. Beginning-of-year staff development and professional learning study groups during the course of the school year are conducted by both administration and teacher leaders. Our system of Responders on Duty and the use of the SAVE room allows students to receive necessary emotional support during times of crisis. Student mediators lead the work of promoting peace, kindness, and respect. At the conclusion of the 2016 - 2017 school year, staff determined that a greater focus on effort, appreciation, and empathy for others was necessary. Therefore, during Summer 2017, we established five key core values: Collaboration, Appreciation, Responsibility, Empathy, and being Steadfast. During the 2017 - 2018 school year, we centered our talk with students around these five core values. During this year's annual Responsive Classroom Institute, held at the conclusion of each school year, the staff developed comprehensive plans for how to make our work with these values even more robust and consistent across classrooms and grades. We planned for the explicit teaching of school wide peer-to-peer conflict resolution practices, pro-social interaction skills, and non-violent communication skills. This planning resulted in the development of an explicit positive social behavior curriculum taught in all Kindergarten - 5th grade classrooms during Closing Circle for the first thirty days of school. Additionally, we planned for proactive preventive teacher strategies, listing these on a shared document for all staff members and developed shared 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  expectations for hallway procedures which are outlined on shared charts and demonstrated through videos of third grade teachers in action. The priority need that is addressed with this goal and action plan is the need to improve overall classroom behavior. While the number of incidents does not reflect poor classroom behavior, learning environment surveys indicate that teachers' perceptions of students' in-classroom behavior needs improvement. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? P.S. 154 adopted a Responsive Classroom framework of social-emotional learning in September 2013. The Responsive Classroom values and tenets guide all that we do. Through daily Morning Meetings and Closing Circles; interactive modeling; shared rule creation; reminding, redirecting, and reinforcing language; as well as logical consequences, we seek to build an inclusive community where students are self-confident and able to self-regulate. It is our hope that stake holders describe the school as joyful, focused, and peaceful. We have two primary CBO partners: the YMCA and City Year. These partners are fully integrated into our instructional classroom work. While all CBO day staff are exposed to Responsive Classroom tenets, we seek to deepen the understanding of the Expanded Day staff as it relates to Responsive Classroom values and ideology. In addition, our CBO partners work with us to increase student attendance, especially those who are chronically absent, and target students’ individual needs. They act as role models with diverse educational experiences and future aspirations. Both CBO partners partake in deliberate learning opportunities that foster student voice and student choice, provide clear expectations for learning and peer interaction, and provide explicit modeling of these expectations. During Winter 2016, P.S. 154 opened a mental health clinic run by Astor Children's Services. The mental health clinic is now open five days a week year round and services up to 30 students at any given period of time. During the 2017 - 2018 school year, we extended our partnership with Astor to include SYNC, a full set of wrap around services for up to eight families at a time. Finally, we believe that student leadership positions are an important part of our overall school plan for students' social and emotional growth. Thus, we reintroduced our peer mediation program and began a P.S. 154 C.A.R.E.S. Committee and P.S. 154 Wolfpack during the 2017 - 2018 school year. During the 2018 - 2019 school year, we will implement a comprehensive community service program that will involve all of our 5th graders. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. According to P.S. 154's 2017 - 2018 New York City School Environment Survey, 100% of teachers report that they "trust the principal," 89% of teachers report that they "trust each other," and 100% of teachers report that they "respect those colleagues who have a specific expertise." Additionally, 96% of families report that they "trust the principal." Moreover, as it relates to high expectations, results from the 2017 - 2018 School Environment Survey show that 100% of teachers believe that "the principal sets high standards for student learning" and 100% of teachers feel that "the principal makes clear to the staff her expectations for meeting instructional goals." During the 2016 - 2017 School Quality Review, P.S. 154 was rated "Well Developed" on Quality Review Indicators 1.4 (Structures for a Positive Learning Environment) and 3.4 (Culture of Learning that Communicates and Supports high Expectations). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  Trust is the underpinning of a high functioning collegial community, yet trust emerges when there are shared values across all staff members and when these values are nurtured and lived out in practice constantly. As a staff, we believe both that we are each experts at something and that we are all ongoing learners. We push each other (administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals, and CBO staff) constantly, to rethink, reimagine, and improve our practices. Open conversations that are rooted in data and tangible next steps are the expectation and the norm. Revision to instruction and school practices is common and encouraged. The foundational values remain steady as we move into the 2018 - 2019 school year. The development and maintenance of our community is ongoing and never complete or at a pinnacle. Rather, we remain committed to our growth as a school and, thus, the growth of each individual staff member. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner YMCA Day staff classroom support in all K - 2nd grade classrooms (includes small group and 1-to-1 intervention); Expanded day for K - 3rd graders; Attendance support; community school services (including food pantry, attendance mentoring, adult education classes, and parent engagement) CBO Focus City Year Day staff classroom support in 3rd - 5th grade classrooms (includes small group and 1-to-1 intervention); Expanded day for 4th and 5th graders; Attendance support How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? During the 2018 - 2019 school year, we will continue to more fully develop CBO day and expanded day staff as it relates to Responsive Classroom tenets and methods. We will utilize school staff to provide professional learning opportunities for YMCA and City year staff. Our Community School Director will play a large role in providing parental support in the areas of job readiness and physical health. Finally, we aim to better prepare our lunch staff, including school aides and YMCA day staff members, to follow consistent structures and more readily engage students during recess and lunch. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? The essential questions related to school culture that we will explore as a staff during the 2018 - 2019 school year are: 1. How can we explicitly teach and consistently encourage children to practice peer-to-peer conflict resolution skills, pro-social interaction behaviors, and non-violent communication methods to express one's needs, wants, and feelings? 2. How can we ensure consistency in classroom expectations across classrooms throughout the school? What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? We will measure student knowledge and understanding as it relates to peer-to-peer conflict resolution skills, pro-social interaction behaviors, and non-violent communication methods by giving internal Google Form surveys to students in January and June. We will measure teachers' feelings about how often and how effectively students are utilizing these skills by giving internal Google Form surveys to teachers in January and June. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, the overall percent of positive responses from teachers on the New York City Department of Education School Environment Survey in the area of Supportive Environment and sub-area of Classroom Behavior will meet or exceed 75%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Average Math Proficiency Rating Average ELA Proficiency Rating 2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Professional Learning: Teachers Student Attendance Responsive Classroom Four Day Institute; Fall Classroom Observation Day; Responsive Classroom Committee RtI Committee: The RtI team will work collaboratively with classroom teachers and Astor Children's Services providers to develop tiered interventions for students lacking appropriate behavioral skills needed to successfully access instruction. Students displaying extreme behaviors Average Math Proficiency Average ELA Proficiency Student Attendance Average Math Proficiency Average ELA Proficiency June 2018 - June 2019 Administration; Responsive Classroom staff developer; Responsive Classroom Committee made up of teachers Internal staff and student surveys will indicate positive progress. September 2018 - June 2019 RtI team (Assistant Principal, School Psychologist, Guidance Counselor, IEP Teacher, General Education Teacher, Save Room Teacher) and Astor Children's Services staff Average percent of teachers earning 3.0 or higher in Components 2a and 2d will be at least 75% by January 2018 Internal surveys of students, teachers, and CBO staff will indicate increased positive environment Implementation of 5th grade Community Service 5th graders Student Attendance September 2018 - June 2019 Administration; Guidance; 5th grade teaching team Students displaying positive 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32  Average Math Proficiency Average ELA Proficiency School wide positive social behavior curriculum created and implemented in all K - 5 classrooms K - 5th grade students Student Attendance Average Math Proficiency Average ELA Proficiency September 2018 - June 2019 Administration; Staff School Environment Committee Formation of School Environment Committee Teachers and paraprofessionals Student Attendance Average Math Proficiency Average ELA Proficiency November 2018 - June 2019 Administration A representative staff member from each grade and a representative paraprofessional behaviors as they relate to our five core values will increase Internal surveys of students, teachers, and CBO staff will indicate increased positive environment as well as increased student effort Teachers and students will report increased positive student social behaviors on internal staff and student surveys. Teachers and students will report increased positive student social behaviors on internal staff and student surveys. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. P.S. 154 will conduct the following family engagement events with the specific goal of increasing parent/guardian awareness of our social/emotional/behavioral practices, goals and expectations: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33   Overview at Fall Open House  Beginning-of-year meeting just for 5th grade parents  Coffee time presentations on Responsive Classroom practices Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Human Resources  Administration and teacher leaders (to lead RC professional development for CBO staff and school aides, family worker, and parent coordinator)  Guidance Team  Community School Director  CBO Staff  RtI Team Financial Resources  Responsive Classroom Professional Development Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, at least 75% of teachers will respond positively to statements asked about Supportive Environment within the sub-area of Classroom Behavior on an internal Google Form survey. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Internal staff surveys and internal student surveys Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Teachers work collaboratively to troubleshoot instructional challenges. They share strategies and methods regularly at team meetings, during inter-visitations, and electronically. P.S. 154 has a robust system of inter-visitation in place. Moreover, our days are structured so that all grades have common preparation periods each day and teams meet to plan and analyze student work at least every other week during OPW time. An analysis of teacher lesson plans and observation feedback during the 2017 - 2018 school year indicates inconsistencies in teacher understandings of effective daily lesson planning. During the 2018 - 2019 school year, we will focus primarily on ensuring that teacher's daily lesson plans include a coherent and realistic teacher-facing learning objective, a student-facing teaching point, an aligned learning plan, and plans for ongoing methods of assessing whether students are meeting the lesson's intended learning goal. Lesson plans and Advance component ratings were the data trends analyzed to determine this area of need. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  P.S. 154's primary model of professional learning is a labsite model. Through TCRWP and Metamorphosis labsite days as well as model classroom inter-visitations, P.S. 154 teachers do the majority of their learning in a real-time, hands-on format. Data-analysis, goal-setting, and instructional planning are a regular practice at P.S. 154. Structures have been put in place to facilitate this ongoing work. First, teachers on each grade level have daily common preparation periods. This allows them to meet collaboratively for planning purposes. Meeting notes are included on the team's shared Google Drive. In addition, as per an SBO vote conducted in Spring 2018, Other Professional Work time occurs on a different day of the week for each grade team. That is, Pre-Kindergarten and Kindergarten teachers and paraprofessionals utilize Mondays, 1st and 2nd grade utilizes Tuesdays, 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade math teachers utilize Wednesdays, and 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade ELA teachers utilize Thursdays. Other Professional Work time will be utilized to analyze student work and develop corresponding lesson plans. These meetings will be facilitated by the principal or assistant principal. Finally, as per an SBO vote conducted in Spring 2018, P.S. 154's cycles of professional learning during the 2018 - 2019 school year take place five times a year in two-week cycles. That is, teachers and paraprofessionals meet every day from 2:35 - 4:05 for 7 - 10 days in a row. In this way, we will be able to dig deep into one topic for many days in a row. Our last learning cycle of the 2017 - 2018 school year centered on lesson planning and assessment. We intend for our first and second learning cycles of the 2018 - 2019 school year to also center on lesson planning and assessment. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? Regular observational rounds of teacher practice (both ADVANCE-rated and non-ADVANCE rated) will be conducted to identify individual teachers' pedagogical needs and determine and provide appropriate supports and professional learning opportunities. School administrators will also meet with TCRWP and Metamorphosis coaches during each coaching day to discuss teacher practice and track and monitor the level of progress in order to maintain a fluid needs assessment that will result in tailored professional learning resulting in positive gains in student learning. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher team leaders will facilitate team meetings using protocols that support effective analysis and discussions of student work. Data sources such as the school-based assessment tracker as well as the TC reading and writing progressions will be utilized to guide the discussions and make instructional decisions that positively impact the grade, sub-groups, and individual learners. In addition, regular inter-visitations will be scheduled so that teachers across the same grade and across the same content area can provide each other with feedback on the effectiveness of strategies and structures discussed in grade team and inquiry meetings. Finally, the 2018 - 2019 school year will mark the start of our best practices video library and best practices lesson plan library. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed F&Ps Intent Teachers will regularly review F&P data and running records to determine a student’s instructional level in reading and identify specific miscues and struggles that are preventing progress. In addition, teachers will use F&P data and running records to plan for small group, guided reading instruction, and develop targeted interventions and supplemental support. The school administration and instructional cabinet will review F&P data to determine school-wide trends in order to make informed decisions about the pedagogical supports and development needed across the school, across particular grades or subgroups and with individual teachers and students. Student writing data The school's child study team (CST) will review F&P data to determine the RtI tiered intervention support students referred to the CST will receive. Running records data will be reviewed to track and monitor the progress students in these tiered interventions are making. Teachers will regularly review student writing data to develop instructional strategies and strategy groups that will have positive gains on student writing. Teachers will used student writing data to also make instructional decisions and modifications to both their writing frameworks and their grammar/language frameworks. In addition, teachers will use student writing data to drive the discussion and the work of the inquiry groups. Lastly, school administration will review writing data to make informed decisions about curriculum, supplemental supports and interventions needed. Math interview and benchmark math data Teachers will regularly review student math interview data and math benchmark data to modify instruction and flexible group in order to meet students' needs more fluidly and maintain a level of productive struggle. The school administration and instructional cabinet will regularly review benchmark math data to determine trends in order to make informed decisions about the pedagogical supports and development needed across the school, across particular grades or subgroups and with individual teachers and students. IEPs The school's child study team (CST) will review benchmark math data to determine the RtI tiered intervention support students referred to the CST will receive. exit slips and performance task data will be reviewed to track and monitor the progress students in these tiered interventions are making. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded and that their learning plans are standards-based and aligned to students' annual goals with a progression stemming from their present level of performance. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37  The school implementation team (SIT) and the school-based support team (SBST) will regularly review IEPs to ensure IEPs written are of high quality and ensure that students receiving special education plans have outlined services and goals that align with the needs outlined in their present level of performance. Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? In literacy, we begin by determining which students are reading far below grade level. Then, we closely analyze students' Fountas & Pinnell assessments, taking note of the area in which they struggle (e.g., accuracy, fluency, comprehension). After this, we consider the interventions the student may have already received. Finally, we determine the most appropriate intervention type and duration. In mathematics, we assign 3rd - 5th grade students four-week cycles of intervention if they are experiencing significant gaps in understanding of key numeracy standards. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, the average teacher rating for Component 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) will equal or exceed 3.0 out of 4.0 as measured by Advance observation ratings and the Danielson Framework. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Collaborative Teachers Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Inquiry Teams: During the 2018 - 2019 school year, all inquiry will focus on mathematics and center coherent lesson planning. Professional Learning Cycles: Focused on Lesson Planning and Aligned Assessment Practices Model Teacher Classrooms Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers October 2018 - June 2019 Inquiry Facilitators (Teacher Leaders); Administration Average Math Proficiency All teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers Administration September 2018 - June 2019 Average ELA Proficiency All teachers (with a focus on new teachers) Average Math Proficiency Framework: Collaborative Teachers Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency October 2018 - June 2019 Teacher leader developer; model teachers; administration How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) The percent of teachers achieving effective or highly effective ratings in Component 1e and 3d will increase. The percent of teachers achieving effective or highly effective ratings in Components 1e and 3d will increase. The percent of teachers achieving effective or highly effective ratings in Components 1e and 3d will increase. P.S. 154 Video Library All teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Coaches, teacher leaders The percent of teachers achieving 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency effective or highly effective ratings in Components 1e and 3d will increase. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent engagement in the area of math will include the following action steps: 1. Initial math parent workshop to introduce parents to our beliefs about the teaching and learning of math (November 2018) 2. Math classroom walks in K - 2 classrooms for parents (January 2019) 3. Series of Instagram math instructional videos for parents of 3rd - 5th graders (February 2019 - May 2019) Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Human and Time Resources: Inquiry facilitators (teacher leaders)   Model classroom teachers  Mentor teachers   Professional learning cycles  Other professional work time spread out across the week  Common, grade-level preparation periods Lead mentor Financial Resources:  Per diem funding for substitutes (inclusive of substitutes to be used during in-school professional learning time)  Missed prep funding to pay teachers for professional learning time that occurs during preparation periods  Model classroom teacher salary stipend  Per session funding for mentor teacher time and lead mentor professional learning meetings  TCRWP and Metamorphosis coaching Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the average teacher rating for Component 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) will equal or exceed 2.75 measured by the Advance observation system and the Danielson framework. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation ratings Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? P.S. 154 has a robust school wide assessment plan in both literacy and mathematics. We utilize multiple shared assessments, share the data publicly, and utilize this data to make many decisions. Alternately, the assessment work that requires our focus is the daily work of considering if and how we are meeting the learning objective(s) that was set for the day's lesson. This consciousness of if and how we're meeting our daily goals and then, if we are not, what our next steps are, is starkly counter to the process of simply determining a teaching point ahead of time and progressing blindly through the lesson. Our average Advance teacher rating for the 2017 - 2018 school year speaks to a need for improvement in this area. Our average teacher rating in Component 3d was 2.76. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? P.S. 154’s overarching vision for leadership is one that links all school staff together through a learning model. That is to say that we are all ongoing learners with particular areas of expertise and strengths to share with one another. We 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42 believe that through consistent and humble questioning of our own practices, we can regularly deepen our school wide knowledge base and improve our school wide instructional methods. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? I believe the following about school improvement: 1. Deep and lasting school change only occurs when those who are involved in the change share key values and these values guide each and every move that is made at the school; 2. All adults have expertise and all adults are ongoing learners; 3. Consistency across classrooms and grades is a necessity What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Various teacher leadership opportunities exist at P.S. 154. During the 2018 - 2019 school year, we aim to limit the number of teacher leadership positions that any one teacher holds to one. This is a deliberate decision aimed at ensuring that teachers have the ability to do both great teaching and lead to their fullest potentials. The teacher leadership opportunities that exist at P.S. 154 are: model classroom teachers, mentor teachers, and Responsive Classroom committee members, and School Leadership Team members. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? Together with the Community School Director, school leadership will hold regular School Leadership Team meetings, Community School Leadership Team meetings, and family feedback summits. Summits will usually take place at the same time as our four parent/teacher conferences. The aim of the summits is to receive feedback on various initiatives from many families. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) F&P data and running records will be reviewed regularly to determine students' instructional levels in reading and identify specific miscues and struggles preventing progress. Teachers will also use F&P data and running records to plan for small group instruction, guided reading instruction, F&P tracker school administration miscue analysis guide teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  and develop targeted intervention and supplemental supports. School administration and instructional cabinet will review F&P data to determine school-wide trends in order to make informed decisions about curriculum and pedagogical supports and development needed across the school, across particular grades or subgroups and with individual teachers and students. The school's child study team (CST) will review F&P data to determine the RtI tiered intervention support students referred to the CST will receive. Running records data will be reviewed to track and monitored the progress students in these tiered interventions are making. Student writing data will be reviewed regularly to develop instructional strategies and strategy groups that will have positive gains on student writing. Teachers will use student writing data to also make instructional decisions and modification to both their writing frameworks and their grammar/language frameworks. In addition, teachers will use student writing data to drive the discussion wand the work of the inquiry groups. Lastly, school administration will review writing data to make informed decisions about curriculum, supplemental supports and interventions needed. Math interview data and benchmark math data will be regularly reviewed to determine the necessary modifications in instruction needed and the modifications in flexible groups in guided reading planning sheets Child Study Team (CST) unit frameworks and weekly lesson plans consultants and coaches CST intervention progress monitoring tracker TCRWP writing progressions school administration teachers inquiry facilitation team math assessment tracker school administration 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  order to meet students'' needs and maintain a level of productive struggle. guided math planning sheets teachers School administration will regularly review benchmark math data with math teachers to determine school-wide trends in order to make informed decisions about the pedagogical supports and development needed across the school, particular grades and/or subgroups and individual teachers and students. unit frameworks and weekly lesson plans Child Study Team (CST) consultants and coaches exit slips and performance task analysis guide CST intervention progress monitoring tracker The school's child study team (CST) will review benchmark math data to determine the RtI tiered intervention supports students referred to the CST will receive. Exit slips and performance task data will be reviewed to track and monitor the progress students in these tiered interventions are making. IEPs will be reviewed regularly by teachers to develop lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded and that their learning plans are standards=-based and aligned to students' annual goals with a progression stemming from students' present level of performance. IEP review and audit protocol School Implementation Team (SIT) BFSC Administrator of Special Education School Based Support Team (SBST) school administration BFSC special educaiton liaison meetings and resources The SIT alongside the SBST will review IEPs regularly to ensure IEPs written are of high quality and ensure that students receiving special education programs have outlined services and goals that align with and correspond to the needs outlined in their present level of performance. Part 3 – Annual Goal classroom teachers Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45 By June 2019, the average teacher rating for Component 3d (Assessment) will equal or exceed 3.0 out of 4.0 as measured by Advance observation ratings and the Danielson Framework. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Framework: Collaborative Teachers Framework: Rigorous Instruction Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Professional Learning Cycles focused on Danielson 1e and 3d Teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, teacher leaders P.S. 154 Best Practices Video Library TCRWP and Metamorphosis staff developers focus on conferring and development and use of math interviews Cycles of Observation; Using a tracking system to ensure more regular classroom walkthroughs Rigorous Instruction: Math Teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration; TCRWP and Metamorphosis staff developers Rigorous Instruction: Math All teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration; ANet Rigorous Instruction: Math How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) The percent of teachers earning 3.0 in Component 3d will equal or exceed 75%. The percent of teachers earning 3.0 in Component 3d will equal or exceed 75%. The percent of teachers earning 3.0 in Component 3d will equal or exceed 75%. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. See earlier discussions of parent and family engagement. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Financial Resources:  Model teacher supplemental salary stipend;  Per session funding for mentor teachers, model classroom teachers, lead mentor teacher, Responsive Classroom committee members;  Missed prep funding for mentor teachers, model classroom teachers, lead mentor teacher, and Responsive Classroom committee members; Funding for TCRWP and Metamorphosis staff developers  Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the average teacher rating for Component 3d (Assessment) will equal or exceed 2.75 measured by the Advance observation system and the Danielson framework. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance observation ratings Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? By promoting a welcoming school environment for families and developing more consistent and accessible modes of communication about school events and student progress, we ultimately seek to improve student attendance. However, noting the challenges we have had specifically with students who are categorized as chronically absent and severely chronically absent, we seek to implement a comprehensive plan to target the very specific needs of students and families in this category. During the 2017 - 2018 school year, we gathered data that showed that the attendance of those students whose parents attended three or more parent events in a given month had significantly higher monthly attendance rates than other students. Therefore, we aim to increase the number of parent events that parents of chronically and severely chronically absent students attend with the ultimate aim of increasing attendance rates of chronically and severely chronically absent students. Students who are chronically or severely chronically absent most often fall behind grade level academically and experience social emotional and behavioral difficulties in school. Thus, by continuing to target our community and family work around both the health and well-being needs of all of our families and the specific needs of the families of chronically and severely chronically absent students, we are more likely to see positive social emotional and academic growth across the school. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? P.S. 154 believes that families are our children’s primary teachers. Therefore, we seek to learn from our students’ parents and guardians all that we can about their children. At the same time, we will work to keep families well-informed while welcoming them into our school in order to both expose them to the daily work that we do and provide resources and opportunities for families that support their growth. P.S. 154 provides parents/guardians with progress reports one time a year in addition to report cards three times a year. Report card conferences are held as student led conferences in grades 2 - 5. Through a Community School model, we hope to better meet the educational as well as physical and mental health needs of our students and impact the educational and careers of our students' families. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? P.S. 154 hosts weekly Monday morning "coffee times" for families. These gatherings support the development of parental relationships with each other and with the school and offer opportunities for families to gather and be exposed to community resources and key school topics. P.S. 154 hosts evening GED and ESL classes three times a week throughout the school year. Childcare is provided. Regular parent breakfasts focused on topics related to student absence (e.g., How Sick is Too Sick?; Treating Chronic Asthma, etc.) are hosted. P.S. 154 offers full wrap-around support services for up to eight families at a time. P.S. 154 offers health and well-being support services to families, including a food pantry and mental health resources, as needed. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? During the 2017 - 2018 school year, a few families emerged as dedicated volunteers and others emerged as positive leaders. These families will continue to be tapped into and utilized as leverage to encourage other families to participate positively in the development of our school community. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? P.S. 154 will utilize four report card conference days/evenings to meet individually with families. In addition, student IEP meetings serve as valuable opportunities for P.S. 154 to get to know students and families better. Finally, weekly parent engagement time is utilized for ongoing parent meetings and telephone conversations. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: School Leadership Team; PTAExecutive Team 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Family partnerships with CBO: Community School Team Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Due to the growth of the charter school within our building, P.S. 154 is no longer able to offer a full classroom for parents. Meeting spacein the library and parent coordinator's office is utilized and work space is provided in the main office and the parent coordinator's office. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? During the course of the school year, a total of four report cards and progress reports are sent home. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, average monthly parental engagement of chronically absent students, as measured by attendance at parent events, will increase by 5% since September 2018. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All families Student Attendance September 2018 - June 2019 Community School Director Administration Food Pantry Coordinator Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency Student Attendance Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency Community School Model: SYNC full wrap-around services for up to 8 families. Food pantry GED & ESL classes School Attendance Team: Team made up of the principal, guidance counselor, attendance teacher (District), Community School Coordinator, and City Year corps members. Strategies include: Daily attendance tracking; weekly outreach and goal-setting with families; parent education; celebrating attendance accomplishments. Attendance mentor focus on parent engagement outreach Students with less than 95% attendance; chronic absentees and chronically late students; PK families Students classified as chronically or severely How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Decrease in percent of chronically absent students September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, guidance counselor, attendance teacher, Community School Director, City Year corps members Decrease in percent of chronically absent students Increase in average monthly attendance rate for PK students Student Attendance September 2018 – June 2019 Community School Director Decrease in percent of chronically 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52  chronically absent. Average ELA Proficiency Average Math Proficiency absent students Attendance Mentor Coordinator Attendance Mentors Principal Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Financial Resources: ● Community School funds ● Title I Parent Involvement funds Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, average monthly parental engagement of chronically absent students, as measured by attendance at parent events, will increase by 2.5% as compared to September 2018. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS attendance records; New Visions Heat Map; monthly Community School Impact Report Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percent of students in each grade reading on or above grade level in September 2018 will increase by 5% as measured by Fountas & Pinnell reading assessments. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Our ELT hour is compulsory for all K - 5th graders and voluntary for Pre-Kindergarten students. Our Expanded Day will immediately follow the ELT hour, running from 3:35 - 5:35 p.m. Monday - Friday. We seek to engage up to 20 Kindergarteners, up to 40 1st graders, up to 40 2nd graders, up to 40 3rd graders, up to 30 4th graders, and up to 30 5th graders. Rich extracurricular programs that include music, drama, sports, gardening, and reading tutoring are intended to encourage student participation. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54   What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? During the our extended learning time hour, teachers will simply expand their day, devoting time to ELA and math intervention and enrichment; handwriting, word work, grammar, read aloud, and social studies and science instruction. Community educators will receive professional development in Responsive Classroom techniques from school staff. They will be supported throughout the year with this by the Principal, Assistant Principal, and Expanded Day Director. Planning support for the Expanded Day will be provided to CBO staff by the Expanded Day Instructional Coordinator as well as the Expanded Day Director. To encourage student attendance at the non-mandatory expanded day hours, we will invite families to join our music, drama, and sports classes. As we do during the regular day, we will also personalize our communication efforts, making regular phone calls, sending CNXT messages, and making home visits whenever necessary. Read Alliance for 1st graders begins February 6th during the expanded day. Early morning success academies for 3rd - 5th graders begin the week of January 14th. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. Key personnel implementing the ELT program will be: ● Administrative team (Principal and Assistant Principal) ● Community School Director ● Teaching and CBO staff Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  Planning for the Expanded Day will begin in June 2018. ELT (2:35 - 3:35 p.m.) will run throughout the school year. The expanded day (3:35 - 5:35 p.m.) will begin in October 2018 and run until mid-June 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Financial Resources: ● Pro rata funding for teachers ● Per session funding for paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, and teachers who do not teach a credit-bearing course  Read Alliance is being jointly paid for by school funding and Community School funding. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In February 2019, the percent of students reading on or above grade level school wide will reflect a 2% increase as measured by Fountas & Pinnell (F&P) reading assessments. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas & Pinnell (F&P) reading assessment Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? P.S. 154 has YMCA and City Year staff members in each of our K - 5th grade classrooms throughout the regular school day. These individuals act as teaching assistants. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 50% of our students will participate in each of the health opportunities offered during the 2018 - 2019 school year. Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? The Community School model supports the health and well-being of both students and families. With more basic needs being met, children and families have greater opportunities to focus on school work and engagement. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population YMCA PK - 5th grade Scope of Service Day instructional classroom support and small group or one-to-one intervention (K - 2nd); Expanded day support (PK - 3rd); attendance support; Community School 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57 City Year 3rd - 5th grade support and development Day instructional classroom support and small group or one-to-one intervention (3rd - 5th); Expanded day support (4th - 5th); Attendance support Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. We will extend our current data tracking system to include student attendance data, health needs, and enrichment and intervention services being provided. The Community School Director will be responsible for tracking with the school nurse and guidance counselor, students’ health and well-being needs so that we may deliberately target services for individual students. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The Community School program will be implemented collaboratively. Key personnel include: ● Community School Director and Attendance Outreach Coordinator ● Parent Coordinator ● Family Worker ● Principal and Assistant Principal Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Resources needed to implement the Community School program:  Human Resources: o Administrative team (Principal and Assistant Principal) o Community School Director o Attendance Outreach Coordinator o Parent Coordinator o Mental Health Clinician on-site o CBO partnerships (YMCA, City Year) o Expanded day staff  Harlem School of the Arts  Mental health clinic and SYNC family services  Attendance incentives  Office of Adult Education (NYCDOE)  Food Bank of NYC Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Our Community School program for the 2018 - 2019 school year begins July 1, 2018 and concludes June 30, 2019. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Bottom 20% of readers/class or grade Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Reading Recovery One-to-one Reading Rescue One-to-one Leveled Literacy Intervention Recipe for Reading Read Alliance During the school day After school Before and after school; Saturdays; Vacations Groups of 3 Small groups One-to-one Small groups Saturday Academy; Vacation Academy Fluency Intervention; Saturday Academy; Vacation Academy Small groups Lunchtime or ELT clubs Small groups Lunchtime or ELT clubs Small groups At risk guidance Small groups During the school day Extended Learning Time Saturdays, vacations ELT; Saturdays; Vacations ELT; Saturdays; vacations During the school day or ELT Mathematics Lowest third Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) English Language Learners and/or bottom third English Language Learners and/or bottom third Outside circumstances; Number of incidents as reported on OORS 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students and families in temporary housing will be provided with the following basic emergency supplies: Backpacks, books, pencils, markers, crayons, pens Winter coats Socks School uniforms Glasses Food pantry food supplies Housing guidance Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). There are currently 15 students in temporary housing attending P.S. 154. Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  Not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Professional learning is a priority at P.S. 154. The administrative team is fully dedicated to supporting educators through high quality professional learning opportunities throughout the school year. Professional learning opportunities are differentiated based upon teachers’ strengths and areas for improvement. We also believe strongly in the power of teacher collaboration and collective inquiry as a form of professional learning. As a result, we are actively structuring time for: (a) grade team meetings; (b) data analysis meetings; (c) Inquiry team meetings; and (d) model classroom inter-visitations. We adhere to the belief that it is imperative to build capacity and leadership from within. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional learning is a priority at P.S. 154. The administrative team is fully dedicated to supporting educators through high quality professional learning opportunities throughout the school year. Professional learning is differentiated based upon teachers’ strengths and areas for improvement. Professional learning during the 2017 - 2018 school year takes three primary forms: (a) on or off-site conferences or workshops; (b) labsite/debrief sessions; and (c) in-classroom coaching. Generally, the more apparent teachers’ individual strengths and areas of need become, the more we utilize an in-classroom model of specifically-targeted, real-time coaching. Two staff developers from the work with all classroom teachers of literacy, including our ESL and SETSS teachers. The focus of our work in Kindergarten – 5 th grade classrooms this year is habitualizing data analysis and planning for effective conferences and small group work. Kindergarten through fifth grade teachers of mathematics are participating in planning/labsite/debrief sessions throughout the course of the school year. The focus of this work is to plan and successfully implement Contexts for Learning units of study as an inquiry-based supplement to our core Go Math! Instructional program. During these sessions, teachers focus on the mathematical standards of practice and effective questioning techniques that will 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  encourage and support inquiry-based learning. Teachers are also individually selected to attend off-site workshop series as a means to increase mathematical content knowledge. All Kindergarten – 2 nd grade teachers and 3 rd – 5 th grade teachers of Literature & Art have attended attend several professional development days at New York City museums and receive related in-classroom support. The focus of this work is effective questioning techniques to push students past surface understandings of texts (both artistic and literary) and towards more inferential, critical analyses. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). We engage students in PK standards-aligned curriculum as well as a Responsive Classroom style of behavior management that is used in our K - 5th grade classrooms. At the end of PK, we conduct Kindergarten classroom visits as well as letter/sound recognition assessments. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Weekly team meetings center on assessment data. Revision to assessments and assessment calendars occurs during these regular meetings as needed. Professional development as it relates to student assessment takes place during weekly team meetings, cycles of professional learning, and labsite days. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local $344,643 $0 $0 $76,818 $12,366 $0 $2,535,462 X N/A N/A X X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e N/A N/A 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 5b N/A 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS154, Jonathan D. Hyatt Elementary School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [P.S. 154, Jonathan D. Hyatt Elementary School] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [P.S. 154, Jonathan D. Hyatt Elementary School] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. ● I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; ● scheduling and promoting activities for parents during the school year, e.g., monthly Principal’s Breakfasts; Parent-Teacher Conferences; Curriculum Night, family workshops, class celebration and events; school-wide events such as Family Literacy Nights, our annual school-wide performing arts performance and assembly programs. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn; ● and always aim to be a Collaborative, Appreciative, Responsible, Empathetic, and Steadfast because P.S. 154 C.A.R.E.S. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After reviewing the spring 2017 EDAT Analysis tool, which compiles data from the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT, Spring 2017 NYS ELA & Math exams, as well as current student data from ATS, we have identified two areas of focus within our ELL population that we would like to provide additional support through the use of Title III funding. 1. The EDAT Data Analysis tool indicated that only 7 ELL students (~20%) progressed one level on the NYSESLAT, while 14 students (~41%) remained at the same level, and 4 students (~11%) actually regressed one level. Furthermore, our data showed that across multiple grade bands, the consistent modality in which our students struggled the most on the NYSESLAT was writing. In order to increase the number of students progressing on the NYSESLAT, we will conduct a before school writing club for our ELLs focused on explicit writing instruction, using TC grade-level rubrics as a guide. Beginning in early October and continuing through early May, a certified ENL instructor will be paid per session from Title III funds in order deliver targeted, direct instruction to these students three times a week before school. Students will be taught various writing styles including narrative, expository and descriptive. They will also practice explicit work with structure, grammar and vocabulary. The program will be offered three times and week from 7:15 - 8:15 a.m. The language of instruction will be English. A certified ENL teacher, common branch or special education licensed teacher will conduct these sessions with the funds provided. 2. The EDAT Data Analysis tool indicated that 12 of our ELL students (34.3%) have been held over in the past 3 years, as compared to 46 non-ELL students (13.8%). Upon further investigation, we recognized that many of these 12 holdovers were directly related to attendance concerns and large absences from school. When a student has been absent a significant number of days, research and common sense indicate that it is hard for them to maintain academic success. In order to address this, the ENL teacher and Assistant Principal will work closely with the attendance team to ensure that all possible efforts can be made to proactively engage the families of our ELLs to ensure that these students are in attendance as much as possible. Barriers need to be identified and individually addressed. This might include providing Title III funds for interventions such as assigning a 1:1 attendance mentor, providing regular feedback and positive incentives for attendance, as well as helping to ensure that other concerns, such as health or asthma are properly supported, educated, and addressed. Additionally, the ENL teacher will be involved in all Promotion-In-Doubt decisions, as well as end of year conversations regarding promotion. The work evidenced through ENL instruction will be kept in a separate portfolio and used as evidence of learning for the four modalities for these students, in addition to their traditional classroom portfolios for reading, writing and math. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The school will provide teachers with professional development opportunities internally as well as externally. Internally, we will use the Title III funds to provide after-school PD so that a certified ENL teacher will work with the grade and Specialty teams to provide ELL-specific professional development on a rotating basis. We will specifically target new teachers in order to provide them with the required 7 ½ hours to meet state-mandates outlined within CRPart 154.2 and ESSA. Additionally, we will provide Title III per session-funded professional learning opportunities for teachers with large ELL populations to study and evaluate various pedagogical techniques and skills to strengthen the effectiveness of strategies used to meet the needs of ELLs. Some of the topics to be discussed during professional learning sessions will include appropriate ELL-specific pedagogical strategies, analyzing and designing instruction based on language needs, analyzing and planning for implementation of DOE resources, and developing high quality differentiated learning plans for ELLs. Furthermore, our ENL teachers will receive outside professional development offered through the Office of ELLs, NYSTESOL, and NYSABE. The ENL teachers will turnkey these sessions to the school community to ensure positive student impact and student achievement for all our ELLs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Community School Director holds weekly 'Coffee Time' sessions for parents in both English and Spanish, which are both options for ELL parents. Additionally, the Principal or Assistant Principal hold monthly breakfast meetings that are offered to ELL parents. Both Coffee Time sessions, as well as Parent Breakfasts, offer a wide range of topics and support around student engagement, instructional support, language and child development, as well as basic family and parenting support. Furthermore, we will continue to provide targeted workshops for ELL parents to help them better support their children as they acclimate and access the English general education curriculum. Some of the topics that will be explored will include: translation and interpretation services, online resources, preparing for the NYSESLAT, and practical tips to help ELLs at home. The ELL parent workshops will be scheduled during the following months: December, February, and June. Parents will be informed about these events through fliers, the school message board and automated phone calls, School CNXT, and the school calendar. The information will be communicated in English and Spanish. Additional translation services will 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities be available at these meetings to ensure that ELL parents have full access to these sessions. Through our Community School partnership, we will continue to provide ESL classes and GED classes for our parents in the evenings, running throughout the school year and summer months. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Jonathan D. Hyatt Borough Bronx School Number 154 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alison Coviello Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Maria Guillen Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Richard Cintron Assistant Principal Bethany Poolman Coach School Counselor Parent Parent Coordinator Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 390 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79 Total number of ELLs 45 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.54%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Presently, P.S. 154x has developed a comprehensive assessment action plan to ensure all English Language Learners are tested to measure language proficiency, specifically fluency and comprehension. After an analysis of aggregated data, students are programmed for identified services. We use the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT to determine the student’s level of English proficiency and the LAB-R to gauge the proficiency of our Spanish speaking students. Additionally, to support academic achievement, instruction is differentiated for content, process and product and delivered via small group instruction, specifically guided reading. Methods such as total physical response and embedding cognates as well as the use of Promethean boards and other multimedia facilitate learning styles as outlined by Universal Design for Learning principles. Our assessment plan is developed to address all four modalities of the NYSESLAT. In Kindergarten, teachers begin the year with an assessment of students' letter recognition and knowledge of letter-sound correspondence. In grades K-5, students are tested 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  for decoding, fluency and comprehension three times a year using the DRA-2/F&P. In addition, all students in grades K - 2 as well as all below level 3rd - 5th graders are administered running records every six weeks. Students in grades K - 5 are given High Frequency Word assessments every six weeks throughout the school year. Finally, students in grades 1 - 5 are administered beginning-of-year, middle-of-year, and end-of-year spelling assessments. Finally, student writing is analyzed at least two times during every unit through work sampling and on-demand writing tasks. Thirty one percent of P.S. 154's K - 5th grade ELLs are reading on grade level as of June 2017, according to benchmark DRA reading data. This is compared to only 14% of 3rd - 5th grade ELLs reading on grade level in June 2015. This year we have continued our initiative to address the language progression within the Common Core Standards by explicitly teaching students spelling through Recipe for Reading, Words Their Way, and Sounds in Motion (K only). Throughout the academic year, all students are assessed with unit-based pre- and post- assessments in literacy and mathematics. Assessment tools include performance tasks, writing diagnostics, reading diagnostics, and unit assessments. Data gathered is reviewed for patterns and trends to make informed decisions regarding resource allocation as well as individualized interventions. For example, differentiated instruction could target such areas as fluency, phonemic awareness and comprehension. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Students in grades K-2 follow a patterns of Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking usage within each lesson. Students in grades K-2 begin each lesson with Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills (BICS) development, often addressing listening and speaking. Students are given a “Communication” topic related to the day’s lesson. Students use pre taught accountable talk prompts/ skills to engage in age appropriate student lead conversations activating the students prior knowledge, as well as setting up the foundation for upcoming concepts/themes of discussion. Following Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills (BICS) development, the teacher will model skills and processes in which students are set to demonstrate independently, often addressing reading or writing. Visual Aids, Music, Art, as well as Tactile/Hands on objects are often used to better student understanding and increase engagement in Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning Students. Students in grades 3-5 similarly work to improve their Reading, Writing, Listening, and Speaking in each lesson. Lessons are planned based on the assessment of students’ needs. Lessons begin with students working on their listening and speaking skills. Students are required to fill out a calendar every day in which they are asked to identify the month, the day, the season, and the weather. Students work with each other to decide what the correct answer is for each. When they both agree on answer, students write down the correct answer on a post-it. Following the calendar activity, students engage in phonics instruction based on their specific needs. Some past focuses have been on short vowels, long vowel patterns, digraphs, etc. Students then engage in Guided Reading in small groups. Guided Reading strategies are picked based on what would most help the student increase their reading level. After reading, students are then asked to answer comprehension questions about the text in writing. For Entering/Emerging students, sentence starters or cloze sentences may be used. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Success is evaluated through multiple sources of information. These include using DRA-2 data (baseline, midline & endline) in English to evaluate student's' ongoing progress. This has been chosen as one of the "Measures of Student Learning" (MOSL). Grade level teams, in conjunction with ENL teachers, set reading proficiency goals based on DRA running records. To evaluate progress specific to English Language acquisition, we use the NYSESLAT, focusing on movement between proficiency levels. To evaluate content acquisition through literacy, we employ the use of the New York State Math and English Language Arts (ELA) assessments, also focusing on level to level advancement. These efforts assist in reaching Annual Yearly Progress targets. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data is gathered, ENL teachers engage in collaborative discussions with content and classroom area teachers 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81  to narrow in on the specific struggles deterring each student from meeting academic goals. Once student challenges are identified, team teachers collaborate on strategies, as well as appropriate changes each student will receive to ensure academic success. Team teachers then meet once a week with student samples to discuss whether implemented strategies have benefited student achievement or not. Teachers take weekly data and collaborate on better possible strategies. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] To service our ELL students within the Response to Intervention framework, data is gathered from multiple sources to serve as a basis of progress monitoring. Universal screening data sources consist of DRA-2,, High Frequency Word assessments, and beginning-of-year, middle-of-year, and end-of-year Words Their Way spelling assessments. Additionally, progress monitoring sources include running records, unit-based pre- and post- assessments, writing work sample analyses, and small group and individual notes. Using these sources of information, students are given intensive Tier II or III reading intervention, including Reading Rescue, Reading Recovery, and Leveled Literacy Intervention. These assessment systems and structures serve the primary function of ensuring that every student is provided support and intervention services before being referred to the special education committee for learning disabilities. This will encompass a cyclical process consisting of the examination of achievement at the classroom level, use of multiple sources of information, the analysis of data through a language acquisition lens, the design and implementation of targeted support and monitoring progress to amend and inform teaching practices. This targeted support occurs in a number of ways. In conjunction with City Year and YMCA, partnering organizations of the school, students receive more focused literacy instruction. Intervention services consist of the following as students move from Tier I intervention services to Tier III intervention services: - Guide students’ early writing by co-constructing predictable and rhythmic books (e.g., poetry, rhyme, and patterned language books) - Promote different types of writing purposes, genres, and formats. - Integrate oral language and vocabulary instruction into writing instruction by having students: -- Creating sight-word books. -- Different types of reading: * repeated reading * readers’ theater * choral reading * partner reading A. Tier I instruction is delivered by all classroom teachers and could consist of whole group data-driven lessons. Student progress is monitored using conference notes, weekly strategy checklists and end-of-unit performance tasks. B. Tier II literacy intervention is delivered by all P.S. 154x pedagogues, City Year Corps members and YMCA staff. Interventions could consist of guided reading, small group strategy lessons, and Level Literacy Intervention. Student progress is monitored using DRA-2, running records, High Frequency Word assessments, spelling assessments, and writing sample analyses. C. Tier III intervention is delivered by all P.S. 154x AIS service provider(s) as wella s City Year and YMCA. We have two faculty members that are trained in Reading Recovery to provide one-to-one tutoring on various literacy skills. Additionally, paraprofessionals, YMCA staff members, and City Year staff members provide one-to-one Reading Rescue daily intervention. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the 2015-16 NYSESLAT, 8% (4/50) of our students are at the entering level of proficiency, 12% (6/50) of our students are at the emerging level of proficiency, 18% (9/50) of our students are at the transitioning level of proficiency, 52% (26/50) of our students are at the expanding level of proficiency, and 10% (5/50) of our students have reached the commanding level of proficiency. The data reveals that most of P.S. 154's students demonstrate a higher level of proficiency on both the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL. We will target these students with customized instruction to reach proficiency. The following areas have been identified as areas to focus our instruction. In literacy, we will focus on vocabulary, phonological awareness, fluency, reading skills (i.e., sequencing, main idea, inferring, comparing and contrasting), comprehension, grammar and spelling. In mathematics, students struggle with basic computation skills as well as developing mathematical solutions for word problems featuring multiple steps. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? P.S. 154x has developed a secure online platform shared by all staff members that allows educators to upload student data for all benchmark assessments, reading and math interventions, as well as any other pertinent information. Along with the student data, educators input strategies put in place for each student’s growth, observation notes, as well as space for out-of-classroom teachers to contribute to the students strengths and weaknesses observed outside of the classroom are implemented into the student’s “learning profile”. Files are updated bi-monthly, or more often as needed, and are open to collaborating teachers as a reliable source of information for planning, preparation, and tracking student growth. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At the entering level of proficiency, students will receive 2 units of ENL service a week. This is equivalent to 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction, which is 1 unit of stand-alone and 1of unit-integrated ENL. At the emerging level of proficiency, students will receive 2 units (360 minutes) of ENL instruction, .5 of a unit (90 minutes) will be free-standing ENL and 1 unit of integrated ENL/Content area, with the other .5 unit (90 minutes) of being either stand-alone or integrated ENL. At the transitioning level, students will receive 1 unit of study a week (180 minutes), .5 units of study in ENL/ELA(90 minutes) and .5 units in either of stand-alone or integrated ENL/content area (90 minutes). At the expanding level of proficiency, students will receive 1 unit of study(180 minutes) in ENL during ENL/ELA or other content area. At the commanding level students will receive instruction for an additional 2 years. These students will receive .5 a unit (90 minutes) per week of integrated EN/ELA or content area. When integrated services are provided we will use a co-teaching model. The students are grouped heterogeneously, but there are designated ELL classrooms. In grades 3-5 the classes move to content area specific teachers for math, literature and art, research and information. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? During the reorganization process, classes were designed in order to ensure that mandated ENL services would be delivered in an efficient manner. There are two certified teachers that are assigned to provide mandated ENL services. ENL teachers schedule their sessions based on the CR Part 154.2 unit requirements for each student according to their proficiency level. Entering and Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction using the stand-alone or integrated model in kindergarten through fifth grade. Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction with the stand-2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  alone or integrated model. Commanding level students receive .5 of a unit (90 minutes) per week of integrated ENL/ELA or content area. When integrated services are provided we will use a co-teaching model. Every student receives ELA instruction from a licensed common branch teacher. ELA instruction occurs a minimum of 120 minutes per day. As the year progresses and new students are admitted, ELL status is considered for class placement and ENL teachers continuously reconfigure their schedules to ensure that students are appropriately grouped and receive mandated minutes of ENL instruction. This is the most appropriate placement based on baseline academic capabilities and assessed abilities. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. From Kindergarten to second grade, students receive content area instruction via their classroom and ENL teachers. In grades 3-5 we feature a departmentalized organizational structure. Students are taught math by one particular math teacher. Literacy instruction is separated into two different courses. The first course is titled Literature & Art. During this one hour daily course, students study narrative reading and writing using units of study from TCRWP. Students also critically examine works of art during this period using Visual Thinking Strategies. Here, in particular, students have opportunities to develop content knowledge and vocabulary. The second literacy course in the 3rd - 5th grades is called Research & Information. This course integrates the study of non-fiction reading and writing with social studies and science content. In order to make the content accessible to ELL students, all common branch and ENL teachers deliver instruction using UDL principles, including, but not limited to, hands-on experiences, multimedia, and graphic organizers. During stand-alone sessions, The ENL teacher pre-teaches and reviews content-area subjects within a small group setting. Content vocabulary is scaffolded through graphic organizers and thinking maps. To support areas such as, vocabulary, phonological awareness, fluency, comprehension, simple and complex sentences, verb tense, organization, basic computation skills as well as developing mathematical solutions for word problems featuring multiple steps the following instructional strategies, methods, and tools are utilized: repeated reading; readers’ theater; choral reading; partner reading; modeled writing; shared writing; independent writing; total physical response; explicit teaching of cognates; the use of multimedia; graphic organizers / Thinking Maps; anticipatory guides; double entry-journals; collaborative posters; and manipulatives 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish speaking students are administered the Spanish LAB to evaluate their native language proficiency. This exam is given once when the student first enters New York City Public School. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. We currently do not have any identified SIFE students, however, we would invite all identifies SIFE students to an early morning computer lab time to work on literacy and math skills using MyOn and iREADY. These students would also be paired with a City Year Corp member or YMCA staff during the school day for additional one-to-one instructional support. B. Newcomers are provided phonics instruction and direct grammar instruction to differentiate for their specific needs using Words Their Way (K), Recipe for Reading (1 - 5), and Words Their Way (K-5). This year we will be adding National Geographic: Reach: In the USA. This text focuses on Language development, high frequency words, phonics and the use of 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  graphic organizers. Further support is provided through guided reading groups, Reading Recovery, and Leveled Literacy Intervention. Schoolwide academic proficiency is further supported through such measures as drawings with captions, thinking maps, small group strategy lessons and guided reading. This model allows us to effectively use ENL methodologies to make ELA content accessible for students. C. The plan for Developing ELLs is to offer these students opportunities for enrichment. These students will explore a variety of non-fiction themes while focusing on how the English language functions. Some of themes include, Native-American in the Northeast, the Community, and Inventors. They will be provided with phonics instruction and direct grammar instruction to differentiate for their specific needs. This group will also receive additional support through Leveled Literacy Intervention, Reading Recovery and clubs during Expanded Day (3:35-5:35 p.m.). These students will be provided with strategies and tools that will allow them to participate fully in the general classroom. Some of these tools include mini-charts, task cards, portable vocabulary rings, and talking prompts. D. Currently, we do not have any long-term ELLs. We would provide these students with Integrated ENL services during the literacy block as well as in content areas. We would offer enrichment activities during Expanded Day. E. Students who are former ELLs will continue to receive support via the ENL teacher during the literacy block or a content area. Classroom teacher or grade teachers (departmentalized grades) will work collaboratively with the ENL to ensure continued success of these students. Students will be encouraged to participate in clubs and special programs in our school community. Many of our former ELLs have taken on leadership roles in our school community. This year we will institute Student Council, which will be made up of a diverse representation of our student body. To further support former ELLs, the following testing accommodations are applied: extended time, separate location, bilingual glossaries, simultaneous use of English and alternative editions, and oral translation of lower incidence languages. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We recognize that ELLs and SWDs progress at different rates along a learning continuum. Accordingly, we makearrangements for students to participate in flexible scheduling. For example, an ELL-SWD who is strong in math may receive math instruction in another instructional setting. Every effort is made to customize instruction to meet the cognitive demand of each student. Small group and individualized instruction is offered and the content is differentiated and sheltered to meet each student's current level of proficiency. Additionally, Promethean boards and ELMOs are used in various classrooms to support ELL students to fully access content and strategies taught. Presently, we are using Santillana Spotlight on English and National Geographic Reach: In the USA during stand-alone ENL. All ELLs and SWDs engage in Visual Thinking Strategies instruction, a program designed to develop content and vocabulary acquisition. ELL students with disabilities receive additional support using such resources as Wilson Fundations, Leveled Literacy Intervention, MyOn, and iREADY. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 154x has instituted a small group model of differentiated instruction, where teachers are expected to meet students' individual needs in small, targeted groups. Group content and make-up shift regularly according to students' changing needs. Classroom teachers are making strategic use of all school staff, including paraprofessionals, ENL teachers, the SETSS teacher, Y School staff, and City Year corps members, to ensure that this small group work happens regularly and is effective. Teachers share lesson plans and small group objectives with these other adults. To meet the needs of our ELL-SWDs, flexible scheduling is employed. For example, an ELL-SWD who has a strong interest in history may receive Research and Information instruction in another instructional setting. To further support students who are ELLs and/or Students with Disabilities, various options, as well as flexible scheduling have been put in place, based on individual student need. For some students, their language and cognitive needs are best met with SETSS services, while others require an Integrated Co-Teaching model. A few students also require a combination of services and may participate in both ICT classes as well as self-contained classes for specific subjects that require greater support. As needed, supplementary instruction is provided. Expanded Day 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  provides a time for more guided reading to take place. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. A majority of interventions are provided in English; however, in some instances instruction is delivered in Spanish. Students who are at-risk are identified using New York State assessment (ELA, Math & NYSESLAT) results as well as our Response to Intervention team, which is our primary mechanism for providing intervention services. All classroom teachers are expected to provide Tier I interventions, such as guided reading and small group strategy lessons. Subsequent to receiving a detailed referral from a teacher, our RTI team carefully considers each referral individually and provides support as needed for literacy or mathematics. With respect to Tier II literacy support, out of classroom support staff (City Year, IEP teacher and paraprofessionals) provide support with such resources as Words Their Way, Reading Recovery, Leveled Literacy Intervention and Reading Rescue. With regards to mathematics, our partnership with City Year offers opportunities for City Year personnel to provide customized one-on-one data (pre-assessments & end of unit assessments) driven support. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the upcoming school year for newcomers we will use National Geographic: Reach: In the USA. This program focuses on language development, high frequency words, phonics and the use of graphic organizers. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not discontinue any programs this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELL students attend our ELT hour and we encourage all parents of ELLs to consider enrollment in our Expanded Day program, which runs from 3:35-5:35 p.m. During the ELT hour, instruction in spelling, grammar, and social studies as well as Math Success, Reading Success, and Writing Success clubs will occur. During the Expanded Day, students will participate in one-to-one reading intervention (Read Alliance), music, homework support, and language instruction. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We are using Leveled Literacy Intervention (kindergarten through 5th grade) as a supplementary resource for instructing English Language Learners. However, our schoolwide curriculum (kindergarten through 5th grade) consists of using Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, Recipe for Reading, Words Their Way, Visual Thinking Strategies, MyOn and ST Math. Leveled Literacy Intervention, and Reading Recovery are used strategically, based on DRA2 data. With respect to technology, our students have access to our computer lab. ELL students use MyOn and ST Math in school and at home, which provides greater access for students to enrich mathematical skills and read books on their level. MyOn includes a comprehension component. Students are given access codes to use both programs at home and track their progress. Further, all students in grades 2 - 5 go to the computer lab for 50 - 90 minutes per week to engage in ST Math. Additionally, every teacher has access to an ELMO and projector or a Promethean Board to deliver lessons based on UDL principles. Presently, we also use iPads and laptops to differentiate instruction. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language is supported through ENL services. Additionally, instructional supports such as word wall visuals (Promethean board), cognates, and bilingual glossaries transfer content from a child's native language (Spanish) to English. Students have access Spanish language books in ENL classroom libraries. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. From grades K-5 we will be using age and grade level appropriate resources to support all ELL students; for example, Leveled Literacy Intervention by Fountas and Pinnell and Santillana Spotlight on English will be used to deliver instruction to all English Language Learners in developing oral language and comprehension skills in order to meet targeted benchmarks. This particular resource is customized to target individual student reading levels. Additionally, Fundations, Reading Recovery, and Reading Rescue will be used to support struggling readers. Accordingly, we will also utilize Go Math! as our math curriculum. Within Go Math!, there are ESL components that offer suggestions for differentiating/sheltering instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are using Leveled Literacy Intervention (kindergarten through 5th grade) as a supplementary resource for instructing English Language Learners. However, our schoolwide curriculum (kindergarten through 5th grade) consists of using Teachers College Reading and Writing Project, SuperKids, Sounds in Motion, Recipe for Reading, Words Their Way, Visual Thinking Strategies, MyOn and iREADY. Leveled Literacy Intervention, Reading Recovery, and Reading Rescue are used strategically, based on DRA2 data. With respect to technology, our students have access to our computer lab. ELL students use MyOn and iREADY in school and at home, which provides greater access for students to enrich both ELA and mathematical skills, as well as access books on their level. MyOn includes a comprehension component. Students are given access codes to use both programs at home and track their progress. Further, all students in grades 2 - 5 go to the computer lab for 50 - 90 minutes per week to engage in iREADY. Additionally, every teacher has access to an ELMO and projector or a Promethean board to deliver lessons based on UDL principles. Presently, we also use iPads and laptops to differentiate instruction. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Presently, we do not have a system to support ELL students before the commencement of the academic year. However, we will continue our Early Morning ELL Program for newly enrolled ELL students. This program will offer newly enrolled students foundational support necessary for academic success; for example, students will have access to MyOn and iREADY where they can read books on their level in both English and Spanish. Additionally, we will offer guided reading in Spanish using Scholastic Guided Reading program throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently do not have any language related electives for any students, including our ELLs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Cycles of observation, debriefing, and planning allow the staff developers from Teachers College Reading and Writing Project to work with individual teachers specifically around the ways to provide access to the curriculum for all students. Strategies for engaging both English Language Learners and students with disabilities are taught and implemented. The TCRWP staff developers have worked individually with classroom teachers, paraprofessionals, and City Year corps members, and YMCA Day Staff. This work centers on meeting students where they are, delivering meaningful small group and individual instruction, and teaching guided reading effectively. All PK - 5th grade classroom teachers as well as our speech teacher (all of whom work with English Language Learners) receive ongoing professional development around Visual Thinking Strategies. This work centers on engaging all students, regardless of their stage of language development, in critical thought about visual texts. Teachers are taught how to facilitate open-ended conversations, while embedding content information and vocabulary into the conversations that ensue. One Kindergarten teacher and the speech teacher receive professional development on the program Sounds in Motion.Classroom teachers receive ongoing professional development through Teachers College, Metamorphosis, and Responsive Classroom. These professional sessions focus on plan and prepare for scaffolded and purposeful reading, writing, mathematical and social-emotional instruction. All of this work directly supports our ELLs to be actively engaged in meaningful academic work, while being included and understood by the student community in meaningful and culturally-responsive ways. Further, ENL teachers are regularly sent to professional development throughout the year. The ENL teachers share the information received by providing professional development for all staff including the administrative team, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, bilingual teachers, guidance counselors, special education teachers, the school psychologist, the school's speech therapists, the school's parent coordinator, and others who work with English Language Learners at our school. ENL teachers typically share ELL strategies during grade meetings where content area teachers are present. Strategies shared have included the introduction of QTEL activities such as anticipatory guides, lap books, specific graphic organizers, vocabulary-building techniques, as well as collaborative posters. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The administration and guidance counselors regularly meet with teachers to discuss the progress of our ELL students. The upper and lower grade guidance counselors see several ELL students for "at risk" counseling sessions. The guidance counselors participate in workshops related to the needs of ELLs throughout the year. ELLs who are transitioning from elementary to middle school are offered workshops to help them complete the middle school application and answer any questions parents may have. In addition, a bilingual teacher is available during these workshops. Students also participate in site visits to a variety of local middle schools. The guidance counselor updates students and parents on middle school open house events and other 2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  activities. All teachers are involved in professional development activities during our scheduled weekly professional development meetings. Some of these professional development opportunities are scheduled to address the mandated 15% for all teachers and 50% for ENL teachers. Sign-in sheets are maintained as a record of attendance at these meeting. Topics include analyzing data, scaffolding and differentiating instruction, aligning instruction to the Common Core Standards, using data to plan effective small group and individualized instruction, close reading, using thinking maps and best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? At the beginning of the school year the ENL teachers provide an ENL introduction workshop. During this meeting, stages of second language acquisition, goals of the program, and practical tools to use at home are explored. Further, our ENL teachers keep open lines of communication with bi monthly outreach on student performance and observations in academic and language growth for our language Learners. Such outreach includes strategies to use at home, using technology to better understand your child's progress, and helping your child to prepare for the NYSESLAT assessment. Our parent coordinator and Community School Director is available to all parents and guardians. As a liaison between our school and the surrounding community. Additionally, parents are invited and accompanied by our parent coordinator to city sponsored ELL conferences. Our parent coordinator actively recruits parents of English Language Learners to participate in leadership roles in the PTA and other scheduled activities. Both GED and ESL classes for parents and surrounding community members are offered in the evenings by our lead CBO, the YMCA. The principal holds monthly Principal's Breakfasts. These breakfasts are open to all parents and focus on topics that are useful and relevant to all parents/guardians. Topics thus far this school year have been: behavior management strategies at home, asthma awareness and management, and encouraging early literacy skills at home. Additionally, our Community School Director conducts many regular events to engage and reach out to all parents, including those who prefer languages other than English. She conducts weekly Monday morning "CoffeeTime" sessions where parents are invited to participate in collaborative discussions with special guests covering a wide range of topics. For example, some sessions have addressed issues involving housing rights, mindfulness, parenting skills, engaging students with academic tasks, and community outreach opportunities such as local social services. Further, our CSD has arranged field trips for parents, social service agency visits, Spring Family Night, and special guest visits, including Sonia Manzano ("Maria" on Sesame Street). All literature and correspondence with ENL instructors is provided in native language and English formats so that parents are made aware of student progress, parent-teacher conferences, entitlement, and peripheral programming. Classroom teachers and ENL teachers are in regular contact with parents regarding their children's language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development in all content areas. The ENL teachers also use the translation unit to ensure that all parents have access to information regarding their child. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are required to sign in at all meetings. The principal keeps all sign in sheets in a binder. When individual meetings are scheduled, the information is sent home in the native language and English. In addition, bilingual staff provide translation during individual meetings. Translators are available during large group meetings. Parents can use a headset to hear a simultaneous translation of the event. All teachers record parent engagement meetings on a Google Doc. SESIS is another place we store documentation of parent meetings for ELLs with disabilities. All Parent Surveys and Program Selection forms are retained in the student's permanent record and accessible for State or City audits and reviews. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  As mentioned above, our Community School Director regularly plans and implements programs for all of our parents. There is a particular emphasis placed on reaching out to our families who speak languages other than English. For example, she has worked with social service agencies that translate and support African immigrant families who speak various languages in an effort to invite our African parents into the school. Further, she herself is bilingual in Spanish and ensures that all programs are delivered in both English and Spanish. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alison Coviello, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 154x - Jonathan D. Hyatt Elementary School School DBN: 07X154 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alison Coviello Title Principal Bethany Poolman Assistant Principal Maria Guillen Julie Tervala Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/2017 6/30/2017 1/1/01 6/30/2017 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X154 School Name: Jonathan D. Hyatt Superintendent: Richard Cintron The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Guillen ENL Teacher yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess the language needs of our parents we collect data from several sources. Primarily we use the Home Language Survey. Part III asks the parents the following questions: In what language would you like to receive written information from the school? In what language would you prefer to communicate orally with school staff? Additionally, we run the RHLA report in ATS to review the home language spoken for our overall population and the current English Language Learners. We also use the Emergency Contact card to collect information about the parent’s home language and their preferred form of communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Blank Afrikaans Bengali English French Fulani Hindi Hausa Spanish Soninke Blank 1 2 281 1 2 0 1 67 7 Blank 0.28% 0.55% 77.62% 0.28% 0.55% 0% 0.28% 18.51% 1.93% Blank 1 2 278 1 2 0 1 70 7 Blank 0.28% 0.55% 76.8% 0.28% 0.55% 0% 0.28% 19.34% 1.93% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Approximate Distribution Open House (curriculum overview) September & May Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. For this document and all of the following items, we use Google calendars to map out all events and plan out translation and distribution timelines, thus ensuring enough time to translate and distribute prior to each event. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We post this event on our school website, translated in Spanish. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  Parent-Teacher Conference September, November & March Weekly Coffee Time Parent Workshops On-going weekly, September - June Monthly Principals' Breakfast Meetings with Parents On-going monthly, October - May can be sent in various languages once the message has been translated using Google Translate. -Individual phone calls are made by teachers to ensure attendance, using the DOE Language Line telephone translation service, as needed. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We post this event on our school website, translated in Spanish. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts can be sent in various languages once the message has been translated using Google Translate. -Individual phone calls are made by teachers to ensure attendance, using the DOE Language Line telephone translation service, as needed. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts can be sent in various languages once the message has been translated using Google Translate. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We post this event on our school website, translated in Spanish. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  ELL Entitlement/Non-Entitlement Letters September Monthly School Calendar & Newsletter On--going monthly, September - June Notification of Holiday Break Institutes December, February and March New York State Exam Dates As per NYS testing schedule can be sent in various languages once the message has been translated using Google Translate. - We back-pack fliers translated in all languages to eligible students. - We send an individual text on the app, "School CNXT", using Google Translate to write the message in the appropriate language. -Individual phone calls are made to ensure attendance, using the DOE Language Line telephone translation service, as needed. - We back-pack these documents home with all students, translated in English and Spanish. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts can be sent in various languages once the message has been translated using Google Translate. -Individual phone calls are made by teachers for students we think would benefit from attending, using the DOE Language Line telephone translation service, as needed. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We post this event on our school website, translated in Spanish. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts can be sent in various languages 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  School closure notices On-going as needed, September - June Summer School & YMCA Enrichment Opportunities June Spring Family Night May Expanded Day After-School Opportunities September once the message has been translated using Google Translate. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts can be sent in various languages once the message has been translated using Google Translate. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts can be sent in various languages once the message has been translated using Google Translate. -Individual phone calls are made by teachers for students we think would benefit from attending, using the DOE Language Line telephone translation service, as needed. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We post this event on our school website, translated in Spanish. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts can be sent in various languages once the message has been translated using Google Translate. - We back-pack fliers translated in English and Spanish to all students & families. - We send a text on the school-wide app, "School CNXT". Individual texts can be sent in various languages 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  once the message has been translated using Google Translate. -Individual phone calls are made by teachers for students we think would benefit from attending, using the DOE Language Line telephone translation service, as needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open House / State of the School (curriculum overview) September Parent-Teacher Conference September, November & March ENL Orientation September IEP Meetings On-going basis, September - June Guidance Counselor meetings On-going basis, September - June interpretation service(s)? The entire principal message is translated into Spanish, and Spanish interpreters are available all evening. For others, our PTA members are able to help translate into a few other languages. Spanish and French translators are available on staff and are assigned to specific conferences, as needed based on home language. Spanish & French translators are available on staff. All other languages can be translated using the DOE Language Line telephone services. ENL services are explained via brochures and videos translated into all languages by the DOE. Spanish & French translators are available on staff. All other languages can be translated using the DOE Language Line telephone services. Spanish & French translators are available on staff. All other languages can be translated using the DOE Language Line telephone services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, parents will be called following contact information on the blue card. Staff members are available to translate information for both Spanish and French-speaking parents. For others, the DOE 24-hour translation telephone service is available. Further, we are able to text our parents via the "School CNXT" app. If 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  needed, teachers and staff use the "Google translate" service to translate written communication into any language. This translation can then be sent via text on School CNXT. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will use a portion of our allotted professional development time to advise teachers and staff of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, as well as the services available through the Translation & Interpretation Department. During this time, the Language Access Handbook will be reviewed and staff will be provided with handouts such as the Language Palm Card and the Translation & Interpretation brochure. In addition, we will review the Language Line telephone translation service provided by the DOE. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In collaboration with the parent coordinator, the ENL teacher will provide an overview of the parent Bill of Rights in a workshop. At that time parents will receive a copy of the Parent’s Bill of Rights and Parent’s Guide to Language Access. The school will post the large poster provided by the Office of Translation and Interpretation at the main entrance where parents sign-in. In addition, a small poster and Language ID Guide will be posted in the main office that indicated the languages that are available for translation. A copy of the Language ID Guide is available at the security desk. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use the Principal Satisfaction Survey and the School Survey for Parents to gauge how well we are communicating with parents in their native language. Additionally, our School Community Director utilizes informal needs-based surveys with parents on a regular, on-going basis, in order to determine the social-service needs of our families. This survey includes two questions about language and school communication. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99 
