 11X169 School Name: BAYCHESTER ACADEMY Principal: CRISTINE VAUGHAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Baychester Academy 321100010169 Pre K - 5 School Number (DBN): 11X169 3500 Edson Avenue, Bronx, New York 10466 718 325 1138 Phone Number: 718 325 1558 Fax: Cristine Vaughan CVaugha2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Cristine Vaughan Janina Jarnich LiviaBrown Kendra Gardner RequelRussell-George N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jeremy Kabinoff Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Avenue, Bronx New York 10469 jkabino@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 519 2620 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718 519 2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Rudy Rupnarain Executive Director:   1250ArnowAvenue, Bronx New York 10469 Executive Director’s Office Address: rrupnar@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 828 4808 Phone Number: 718 519 2626 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Cristine Vaughan Janina Jarnich LiviaBrown RequelRussell-George KendiaHyppolite Kendra Gardner *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Member/ Teacher Member/ Assistant Principal   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AdoraOkogeri Dawn Richardson Johanna Alvarez MaclaudVolson Eileen Murphy Tonya Arnold Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Social Worker Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of Baychester Academy (PS 169) is to foster a safe and supportive learning environment with strong parental partnerships and collaboration amongst educators. We strive to educate students academically, emotionally, and socially. Through data-driven instruction and rigorous tasks, we prepare each student with the foundational tools necessary for success in middle school, high school and college and careers.   At Baychester Academy we believe: ● If high expectations are set, every student can achieve their highest levels of academic excellence. ● All adults are responsible for ensuring that all students excel academically. We will unlock the potential of each and every student. ● Great schools are led by great staff members. At Baychester Academy, a school of great expectations, every staff member will be an instructional leader who is responsible for coaching and serving every student. ● All students will develop the competence, critical thinking, social and civic skills to reach their highest potential in the classroom and in life. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. At Baychester Academy, we are driven by the collaboration of all stakeholders in the development and growth of each child. We believe we operate in a professional learning environment where each stake holder's input is paramount and essential to the success of our students. As such, we involve all staff, administrators, teachers, paraprofessionals and parent representatives in the instructional planning and behavioral meetings that will impact academic and behavioral performance. This past school year (2017-2018) we partnered with three other schools in the Bronx in District 11 in conjunction with IDEO's Teachers Guild. Teachers learned and applied the Design Thinking for Educators method to build a culture of creativity and creative leadership. Teachers developed the focus question, "How might we create joyful classrooms that inspire wonder and belonging?" Each school hosted at least two events where teachers and administrators worked collaboratively to address the focus question through developing design projects and discuss the impact of these new implementations. Design projects were connected to school culture, curriculum matters, and classroom practices and will continue to be examined and refined during this new school year. We will continue our collaborative design thinking work with our cohort in SY 2018-19 with PS 41, PS 153 and PS 175. Teams are at the heart of the school! The following teams are at the core of our work: Grade Leader: The grade leaders meet four times a month in a cross grade session (Pre Kindergarten through Fifth) where teachers:  Work to align the school’s current curriculum with the Common Core Standards 0  Support colleagues in the implementation of the Common Core Units of Study   Assist in planning with the grade team, gathering materials, and compiling resources  Review student work as a team, throughout the unit, to ensure the students are mastering the content and deciding on actionable next steps  Responsible to devise a system to monitor the teams’ progress and provide evidence of the planning  Analyze data and turnkey findings to the team  Use data to drive planning  Work closely with administration to debrief team meetings, progress, and next steps  Work with consultants on unit planning and using current data to differentiate support for the grade.  Facilitate meetings Child Study: The child study team meets twice a month. This team is made up of the school social worker, Academic Intervention teachers (AIS), the Special Education Teacher Support Service providers (SETSS) and the School Based Support Team (SBST) members. During meetings, the team discusses students that are struggling with behavior and or academics, and develops individualized support plans. These students are tracked for 6-8 weeks. The team reviews data and adjusts the supports as needed. Many of our staff members have been trained in the District 75 STOPP which uses the LCI protocol to de-escalate crisis behavior. As a result of the ongoing work we do around improving behavior, systems, and structure, we have 60% fewer students in Tier 2 and 3 compared to the national average. Data Team: The Data Team meets twice a month and analyzes school data. Teachers input all data into the Google drive. When the team meets, the data is reviewed, patterns and trends are identified and reported to the staff at Monday Professional Development sessions. This data is used by the entire faculty to drive instruction and tailor support for students. Student Government: The students in third and fifth grade can also participate in student government. Under the direction of a faculty member, this group facilitates our BA ROCKS monthly assemblies, organizes the Penny Harvest, visits the neighboring nursing home, and raises money for selected charities. S.T.E.A.M. During the 2009-2010 School year, we formed a partnership with Education through Music. Through this program, our fourth and fifth graders have formed an orchestra with instruments including the violin, the bass and the cello. The music teacher works with grades pre-K through fifth grade on music education. During their class time, students read music, analyze lyrics, and discuss the meaning of different selections. The students are developing performance skills and working as a team. We received a grant in 2013 from VH1 Save the Music. This grant was used to support the rental of instruments used for our orchestra. Every year, the students participate in two concerts – winter and spring. We launched a visual arts program during the 2015-2016 school year. Through working with the visual arts teacher, students have studied a variety of artists and used their techniques in their own work. The teacher follows the Visual Arts Blueprint and has created an art studio for students to work in. The teacher also collaborates with classroom teachers to align the ELA and Social Studies units to art projects. 1  Baychester Academy Robotics Club (BARC) is open to 5th grade students. Throughout the year the students studied the computer science of coding, built Lego robots and wrote their own programs for different challenges they were given. In addition, in June 2016, the students in BARC had the opportunity to visit JFK airport to meet with the pilots of the Solar Impulse plane (first solar powered plane to travel around the world.) This initiative was offered to our students from the Swiss Consulate. This year, we received a C.A.S.A. grant from Council Member King offering a 24 session after school Build A Musical workshop for grades 3 and up. We participated in a similar program last year with 2nd grade students. This program includes up to 35 students who will work with an Inside Broadway teaching artist to learn and build skills in dance, voice and acting and will use those skills to perform in a culminating show for the school community. Students will also work with a scenic designer to create a backdrop for the show and will receive scripts, CDs, lyric sheets and costume pieces. Each participant will receive a trophy bearing their name at the culminating event. Participants will be invited to Inside Broadway’s exclusive “Creating the Magic” seminar with the cast and crew of a hit Broadway show. This seminar explores the careers available in professional theater and includes performances by the cast and technical demonstrations by the crew. Our school will also receive two performances of Inside Broadway’s professional Equity Tour of “The Gershwin’s Real Magic” in your school auditorium. This professional production travels with its own sets, lighting, sound and costumes and comes with our specially designed Study Buddy Study Guide. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. ENL and Special Education Services Students are immersed in the curriculum with scaffolds to help them. The ENL teacher supports the students in the classroom through an integrated and standalone model in both ELA and math. We have two self-contained special education classes, and one ICT class. Student goals are identified and lessons and tasks are modified or differentiated to meet their needs. Students’ progress is monitored regularly. This data is used to mainstream students into the general education classes for ELA and/or math. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Most Growth Last Year ● Improved Teacher Pedagogy, as evidenced by 100% of teachers being rated “effective” or “highly effective” for the 2017-2018 school year ● Targeted and Strategic Professional Development provided by teacher leaders and consultants ● Teacher Teams: Daily Common Planning time so that teachers can work collaboratively, creating unit and lesson plans and analyzing students work. 2  Areas of Focus Improving outcomes in ELA and math for all students   Clear communication of high expectations to both students and staff  Providing targeted training for families during the Parent Engagement time on Tuesdays  Strengthen our students' social-emotional growth 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X169 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 409 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 27 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 50 35 17 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 78.0% % Reduced Lunch 5.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.0% 21.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 60.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 70% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 14 14 93.6% 6.8% 16.4% 73.3% 1.2% 3.2% 4 4% 7.1 52.9% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Baychester Academy uses a multitude of resources to deliver Common Core aligned instruction that meets the needs of all learners. We utilize ReadyGen, Expeditionary Learning, and EngageNY math modules. Instruction is customized by the specific grade teams. When the team meets to plan the units, they consider what the learning targets are and what tasks and assessments are needed for the students to achieve at a high level. The teams use different resources tailored to the students’ needs. When planning for instruction all students are considered. Teachers plan differentiated tasks to provide an entry point for all learners. All instruction is aligned to the Common Core and the power standards are identified. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills, as evidenced by their work and the high level conversations that takes place in each classroom. After reviewing the Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) end of year English Language Arts (ELA) assessments, 95% of students made at least 1 level of progress. Strengths: Strong teaching practices, as evidenced by teacher observations. Strong assessment practices, as evidenced by teacher observations.    Teachers are normed using the 7 trait rubric, used when scoring the MOSL Assessments  Students are given a weekly on demand writing task, which allows teachers to track students’ progress and data that will inform the teacher’s instruction. Students that are at risk receive academic intervention  During writing instruction students are given feedback that is specific and actionable to improve their craft.   Teachers differentiate the instruction to meet the needs of all the learners in the class  Teachers are given common planning time to plan, discuss best practices and to analyze writing data  Teachers model writing pieces and display them in classrooms for further reference  Teachers take anecdotal notes to assess students’ needs and form groups  Teachers use rubrics to assess students, which allows students to self assess and also assess their peers writing Needs:   Increase the number of level threes and fours on ELA performance tasks. Improve the number of students reading on grade level 5  Strengthen independent reading practices   Continue to improve the quality of reading and writing conferences that teachers conduct with students.   Continued professional development for teachers on student engagement and ongoing assessment practices.  Maintain adequate yearly progress for all students in ELA. Implement a Mid-Year checkpoint to monitor students' progress in ELA Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students' iReady ELA assessment data will show that 85% of students met or exceeded their individual target progress points for the year and 65% of students in the school score on or above grade level in reading. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?   development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Improve the quality of writing conferences across all classrooms by using mentor texts and student tool-kits to support students during the writing mini-lessons, small groups and one-to-one conferences All Teachers Sept 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers, , SETSS, ENL, Administration  Create Expeditionary Learning/ReadyGen lesson plans to emphasize close reading, text analysis, team talk and reading responses.  Embed discussion protocols across all classrooms to ensure high levels of discourse.  Monitor independent reading by following up with reading assignments and reading logs.   Self-contained teachers and ENL teacher will continue to work collaboratively with the general education teachers to modify the curriculum to meet the needs of their students. SETTS teachers and providers will provide targeted support for reading and writing aligned to students' goals and needs. All students including ELLs, and students with disabilities Sept 2018 to June 2019 Classroom Teachers , SETSS, ENL, Administration  Continue to provide the morning program to students in Grades 3-5 three days per week to give students access to rigorous grade level texts and performance tasks.  Create a differentiated program for students performing at or above level that meets 4 times for month. SETTS provider provide Wilson lessons to students in K-2 who are performing far below level twice per week in a morning program.    Use the iReady benchmark assessments given three times a year to progress monitor how students are performing.  Administer 2-3 ELA Simulation assessments in November, January & March for students in Grades 3-5.  Grade teams continue to design and refine unit plans, lesson plans, and tasks and analyze student work. All Teachers Sept Administrators 2018 to June 2019 Grade Leaders Data Team Teachers 7  Data Team will create bi-weekly snapshots of weekly on demand writing tasks, iReady assessments and MOSL assessments and share with the staff.  Teachers will use the data to revise unit plans, implement differentiation and supports for the varying groups in the class.  Administrators will conduct monthly classroom observations and provide feedback to teachers.  Provide parents with progress report 4 times per year Parents Sept Administration (November, January, March, May)  Conduct parent workshops on MyOn and reading and writing strategies 2018 to June 2019 Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will conduct a "Back to School Night" Information session in September. Throughout the school year the school will have parent workshops on various topics (homework help, understanding the curriculum, reading strategies, managing difficult behaviors, Common Core Math, preparing your child for the state exam) Parents will also have access to resources on the school's website. Teachers will frequently give parents information about their child's progress. Teachers and the Parent Coordinator are key personnel in delivering these resources. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Time allotted to parent outreach will be used for parent contact, updating class websites, developing newsletters, sending e-mails, creating parent workshops, work on progress reports  Provide targeted professional development on Mondays and Tuesdays  Curricula materials that are common core aligned Inter-visitations to classrooms and other schools   Common Planning Time  Per session for teachers  Provide resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 8  The January 2019 iReady assessment will serve as the mid point assessment. The Data, team will analyze the results of the On Demand Writing, the ELA simulation and the iReady assessment to determine if we are on track to meeting the goal of 65% of students reading on grade level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The iReady reports, Mid Year MOSL and ELA simulation results that are generated after each assessment along with the analysis of the data by the data team. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? At Baychester Academy, we use the research based program, PBIS, which is a behavioral and instructional support system designed to enhance student success. We utilize PBIS on the school-wide level, addressing behavioral and/or academic concerns such as out of classroom behavior and progress in completion of classroom assignments and homework. Our PBIS program is effective because we establish school wide expectations for positive behaviors. We find that using positive reinforcement for acknowledging expected behaviors have increased the chances that the behaviors will be repeated thereby leading to enhanced character and overall positive school climate. In addition, we also use the tier 2 and 3 intervention strategy, Check-In/Check-Out to help monitor student behavior which promotes individual accountability and responsibility in students and builds communication between parent, student and teacher. Strengths  PBIS- established school wide behavior system that has targeted differentiated strategies for Tier 2 and 3 students  Child Study Team meets twice per month to access and provide interventions for students who are at behavioral and academic risk  At risk/mandated Social Worker, Child Study Team  Cabinet meeting to review behavioral data  Monthly assemblies to reinforce positive behavior for all grades  Teaching students how to identify the seriousness of their problem and how to resolve conflict  Teaching positive character traits school wide through character education books monthly Needs  Getting all staff and students to take ownership and accountability for maintaining order and discipline in the classroom and in the whole school Students take ownership of positive character actions and advocate for themselves and others   Dedicated time scheduled for teaching conflict resolution and problem solving skills on an ongoing basis Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  By June 2019, students will consistently demonstrate behaviors that reflect a respectful, organized, cooperative, kind and safe school climate. This will be assessed by a variety of measurement tools such as a reduction in teacher removals and a 15% decrease in the number of cases reported in OORS and SWIS compared to the data from the 2017-2018 school year. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Social worker will use the “Positive Action” curriculum and conflict resolution techniques and skills to teach positive behaviors and reinforce class/school expectations on an ongoing basis. Mandated/at risk students Sept 2018 – June 2019 Social Worker, Teachers and Administration All Books of the Month will be character education based. The ENL, SETTS and AIS providers will collaborate with the general education teachers to modify and differentiate the tasks ELLs, and the other subgroups in the class. Safety team will review the SWIS and OORS data once per month to monitor the incidents that are occurring and share findings with the staff. Continuation of P.B.I.S monthly assemblies where students would be acknowledged for demonstrating the R.O.C.K.S behaviors. (Respect, Organize, Cooperative, Kind, Safe). Parents will be invited to P.T.A monthly meetings as their children will be acknowledged with an award for following the R.O.C.K.S. Parent Workshops and meetings focused on the expectations of student behavior and conduct. All staff Sept Safety Team 2018 – June 2019 Administrators All Grades Sept 2018 – June 2019 Parents All school staff (teachers, paraprofessionals, support staff, student government and administration) Parent Coordinator and PTA members Specific activities during Physical Education class and at recess that are targeted at developing teamwork and cooperation All Grades Sept PE Teacher and Administrators 2018 – June 2019 Continuation of Breakfast Club and Check-In/Check-Out Mandated and At Risk Sept 2018 – June 2019 Social Worker 2 Review Check-In/Check-Out goals monthly, revise goals when needed to best support students’ needs as well as grade level expectations. Students in All Grades The social worker will continue supporting the at-risk and mandated counseling students Conduct parent meetings for major infractions/incidents All Students Sept 2018 – June 2019 Teachers, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator and Administration. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Workshops and meetings focusing on the expected student behavior and conduct. Provide parents with the parent compact in September. Parents will be invited to P.T.A monthly meetings as their children will be acknowledged with an award for following the R.O.C.K.S. The following individuals will be responsible for implementation and oversight: Parent Coordinator, Social worker, Teachers and Administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. STOPP Training (school social worker)  Positive Action curriculum purchased for every grade level  Conflict resolution training for teachers and paraprofessionals  Effective De-escalation techniques (for teachers to use with Tier 2 and 3 students)   Continued Professional Development and in-classroom support  Prizes/Treasure Chest for Pre-K-2 and privileges/events for grades 3-5  More parent workshops for parents  2 monthly PBIS assemblies- one K-2 and one 3-5  P.T.A meetings  At risk social worker Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 3  The SWIS and OORS data will be analyzed in January 2019, (mid point check) to identify if we are on track to meeting the goal of a 15% decrease of incidents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The OORS and SWIS data will be tracked in a googledoc. Administration will review and analyze all behavioral data monthly. SWIS data and OORS data will be shared with the staff. An analysis of the results from the school survey will be conducted in November and May. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The faculty of Baychester Academy works collaboratively to make decisions about the Professional Development needs of the school to create a sense of shared responsibility. The professional development team has worked on creating a needs assessment and creating a plan that meets all teachers needs. Many teachers have received specific Danielson training focusing on the area of best teaching practices and utilizing assessment to drive instruction. In order to keep the level of teaching high, we have placed a special emphasis on Domain 3, Competency 23: Using Assessment in Instruction. In addition, all consultants who work in the school offer feedback in the areas of Assessment in Instruction. Consultants from Algebra for All and Generation Ready are working with teachers to increase student's conceptual knowledge in math and build accountable talk. Teachers benefit from tailored learning opportunities with the professional development team and outside consultants and have seen a positive impact on their teaching as evidenced by 100% of teachers being rated effective or highly effective. Another example of teacher collaboration is through the Grade Leader team. The grade leaders will open their classrooms to lab sites, work with teachers, and provide professional development to colleagues following observation cycles aimed at improving teacher practice. Administrators and grade leaders are using the inquiry process to create differentiated tasks and look at student work to make informed decisions about instruction. P.S. 169 is working with the Teacher's Guild to create action plans that address the needs of the school community. Specific teams are using the design thinking process to collaboratively create these actions plans. The Child Study Team is focusing on creating an action plan to meet the social emotional learning needs of our students. The Grade Leader Team is focusing on incorporating engagement and wonder into classrooms to increase student achievement. The Data Equity Team is designing an action plan to track and monitor the progress of marginalized groups of students within the school specifically Boys of Color. These teams conduct a monthly Professional Development to improve instruction and share best practices to increase overall student achievement. Strengths Looking at student work inquiry meetings weekly.   Using the Common Core aligned curricula provided by the NYCDOE.  Tweaking and revising the curricula to meet the needs of all students. Needs Support for teachers in building effective instruction based on rigorous expectations.   Analysis of the rigor of tasks, questions, groupings and assessments. 5   An increase in the number of teachers achieving an Effective or Highly-Effective rating in the area of Engaging Students in Learning according to the Danielson Framework. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. At least 85% of all teachers will receive a rating of effective or highly effective in Competency 3c: Engaging Students in Learning for their final Advance Rating of the 2018-2019 school year. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Continue to provide professional development on engaging students in learning; use the Danielson Rubric to create a checklist of what engaging students in learning practices look like in the classroom for teachers and students. Teachers Sept Administrators, Grade Leaders 2018 – June All Staff 2019 Sept 2018 – June 2019 Administration, Grade Leaders, Consultants, Data Team Students and Sept Teachers, Administrators Teachers 2018 – June 2019 Teacher leaders will work with the staff members to assess the curricula to the CCLS and make adjustments as necessary, including planning rigorous tasks to use as assessments and targeting what areas to assess, when to asses and how to assess the students. Teachers will share best practices in a non - evaluative format during grade leader meetings and professional development sessions. Inter-visitations by teachers to observe other teachers' engaging students in learning practices. Teacher will provide students with thoughtful work, high level questioning and academic questioning as indicated in the rigor rubric. Teachers will use entrance tickets, mid point checks and exit tickets to group and monitor students' mastery of the concepts taught. Teacher will provide opportunities for students to self assess, and peer assess using rubrics or checklists. 7  All Teachers Sept Administrators Administration will analyze teacher observation data from Danielson to measure if teachers are using the feedback and the professional development to improve practice. 2018– June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Resources and information will be shared with parents during planned Parent Workshops and school leadership meetings. Teachers will also reach out to parents on Tuesday during the parent engagement time to discuss students' performance and ways parents can support the children at home. The individuals responsible for implementing are Parent Coordinator, Social worker, Teachers and Administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Consultants (ELA, Math) ● Schedule inter-classroom visitations ● Data Team (working in conjunction with teachers) ● Grade leaders for each grade ● Funding for incentives ● Assistant Principal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January, 2019, after the second round of observations (mid point check) the administration team will review Advance observation data to see where teachers are trending. at this point we expect to see at least 70% of teachers achieving Effective or Highly Effective in engaging students in learning (3c). Goals will be set and targeted professional development will be provided to teachers who are developing or ineffective in that area. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 8  The Administrative team will analyze Advance data 3 times (December, February, May) per year. Based on the data teachers will be given targeted support. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The spring 2018 New York State Math examination results indicated that 53% of Baychester Academy students are meeting grade level proficiency. This data shows a 3 point decrease from the previous year. Strengths:  Math assessment data is analyzed by the data team as well as teacher teams.  The math consultant works with teams to develop action plans and units of study that will support student achievement.  Teachers follow the 5-day math exemplar protocol to increase students’ problem solving skills and develop their conceptual understanding.  A math flow that checks for understanding throughout the lesson (application problem, entrance ticket, mid-point check, exit ticket, debrief)  Ongoing math professional development  Math manipulatives in every classroom  Encourage students to draw models/diagrams that represent the problem  Common planning time for grade leader meetings (during the school day, after school and before school)  Parent workshops on math concepts and strategies Needs: Increase the number of students achieving level 3 or 4 on rigorous math exemplars.   Teachers plan for the weekly problem around the topics being presented from Engage NY.  Math consultant reviews the student data with each grade team monthly to offer support and next steps.  Teachers need to track students I-ready progress by using scale scores.    Parent letters highlighting the topic that will be taught in each module.  Build math fluency by incorporating number talks. Students need more practice in learning their basic facts. Improve students' reading comprehension and deciphering skills to improve word problem solving. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  By June 2019, 40% of the faculty members on the school-based teams will utilize design thinking problem-solving strategies to improve student engagement and performance in math across the whole school evidenced by a 5 percentage point increase in the number of students scoring a level 3 or 4 on the NYS math exams given in the spring. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Data team and grade teams will analyze weekly math POW results to determine next steps for teachers and students. All Students Grade teams will analyze students' work and plan next steps using the design thinking protocol. September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators Teachers All Classroom Teachers September 2018- Administrators Consultants Teacher Leaders All Teachers IDEO team will lead professional development sessions on design thinking. Provide tailored professional development for teachers based on data gathered from observations, teacher requests, walk-throughs and student work. Ongoing assessment of learning by following the math flow and the math POW protocol. Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 June 2019 All Paraprofessionals Grade teams will collaboratively develop rigorous CCLS math problems to improve students’ conceptual understanding and problem solving skills for the varying groups in the class. All Students Sept. 2018 - Grade Leaders June 2019 Administration SETTS, AIS and ENL providers will conduct small group differentiated instruction/tasks to meet the needs of individual students as indicated by math POW scores and Engage NY exit tickets. Weekly meeting with AIS and SETSS providers to discuss students' progress and effective strategies they can implement to achieve success. All Students Sept. 2018 - All Teachers June 2019 Paraprofessionals All Students Sept. 2018- All Teachers June 2019 Paraprofessionals Provide morning school program for at-risk students. 2 Weekly math challenges to reinforce basic math skills All Students Sept. 2018 - Classroom Teachers Incorporate number talks to build fluency and automaticity . June 2019 Paraprofessionals AIS and SETSS 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During SLT meetings a representative from the IDEO team will share the work that is going on in the school around the design thinking process. Principal would give an update of how the school is supporting their children at the PTA monthly meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher-generated tasks using the Essential Math Question of the week  Math consultant  Math AIS teacher  Data Team IDEO Team   Per-session  Grade Leaders to facilitate “Looking at Student Work Protocol”  Assistant principals to work with grade teams Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid point benchmark will be the February 2019 math simulation exam and the tally of how many teachers are involved in the design thinking work across the school and the effectiveness of the team's work evidenced by a 5% increase in performance from the initial math simulation exam that was administered in December 2018 and the one given in February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By December 2018, a math simulation exam will be given to students. Another one will be given in February 2019 and analyzed by the data team to see if the students' performance is increasing. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Baychester Academy had 66% of its family attending two or more parent teacher conference for the 2017-2018 school year. Parents had the opportunity to find out how their child was performing. The annual " Back to School Night" was held in September. During this time parents had the opportunity to get an overview of the 2017-2018 goals, curriculum, last year's data, programs and supports offered and to meet their child’s teacher. A total of 50% of parents attended this event. Throughout the school year parent workshops were offered by the parent coordinator, reading coach, Academic Intervention Providers (AIS) and the school's social worker. Teachers used the thirty-five minutes parent engagement times on Tuesdays to communicate with parents and/or to meet with parents to discuss their child's progress. Several teachers also scheduled parent meeting before and after school. Strengths: School events for parents and students  Parent workshop opportunities   Meet or call parents during parent engagement time on Tuesdays Frequent communication with parents (letter, flyers, phone calls)  Flexible in schedule meetings based on parents availability  Invitations to parents for writing celebrations and class events  Needs: Increase parents attendance at Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings Increase in the number of parents attending parent teacher conferences    Parent volunteer committee to assist to create a calendar of events Part 2 – Annual Goal 4  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, at least 70% of parents, a 4 percentage points increase from SY 2017-2018, would have attended two or more of the Parent Teacher Conferences (September, November, March, and May) or Parent Engagement events that occur throughout the school year. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Parents will have the opportunity to attend workshops throughout the year (i.e homework support, Math (EngageNY) English language learning workshops, strategies to use at home with struggling students, reading, workshops, parenting techniques, behavior management strategies) Host school-wide events for families and parents (mother and son game night, breakfast with the orchestra, ballroom dance, breakfast with the principal, mothers' day breakfast, winter and spring concert, classroom writing celebrations) Encourage families to attend the Title one trip Teachers will sign up for at least two PTA and/or school events to attend for the year. Updated informational bulletin board in the lobby and provide a community resource binder (academic support, emergency assistance, bus service, childcare) for families. Provide parents with a monthly calendar so that they are aware of school events. Parents will also receive weekly letters and flyers. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents Sept. 2018 -June 2019 Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinator Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinator 6 Parents Sept. 2018 -June 2019 PTA Teachers Administrators Parent Coordinator Parents Sept. 2018-June 2019 PTA Arrange for Robo-calls (automated telephone call )to families informing and reminding them with important information (parent-teacher conferences, school holidays, upcoming exams events). Create a google doc for all teachers/staff to input events. (i.e. trips, workshop dates, no school). Conduct orientation for new families to Baychester Academy. Update the information on the school's website for parents and as a means for them to contact staff members. Many parents and teachers communicate through Class DoJo. Work collaboratively with parent leaders to encourage parents to attend school events. During “Back to School Night” the PTA will give parents information about dues, contact information, uniforms and PTA-sponsored school wide events. Schedule PTA meetings the same day as family event to ensure higher parent attendance for the meetings. Give parents awards at the PTA meetings. Host events for families and parents (VIP dance, safe Halloween night/Harvest Festival, Vision Board night, Movie night, book fair, Bingo for the younger grades and their parents and at a separate time Bingo for the older students). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Ultimate Enrichment After School Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  PTA Executive Board  Per session for staff to update school website  Parent coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All parents/ guardians will be asked to provide an email/ phone number by December 2018. Families should have received a total of 4 monthly newsletters for the school year that is created by the PTA and parent coordinator. Parents will be provided with school-wide updates on the school's website. In January 2019 it is expected that an updated phone number and email addresses will be provided in a second telecommunications drive. By February 2019 there will be an analysis of how many parents' contact information on file is accurate, the number of newsletters that have been sent out and that website is updated with pertinent information. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning environment survey   Attendance sign in sheets for all meetings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Differentiated instruction, Strategy groups, Small group, one-one Daily during the school day Before school three days per week Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) An analysis of the 2017-2018ELA data (New York State Exam results, baseline assessments) Mathematics Science Social Studies An analysis of the 2017 -2018 data, Baseline Assessments and New York State Exam Results End of Unit Assessment, Classroom Observations End of unit Assessment ReadyGen, Expeditionary Learning, Wilson Reading, Leveled Literacy Intervention. Fundations. ELA program Close reading Differentiating the EngageNYmath modules Extended day math program FOSS Small group, one-one, Daily during the school day Small Group Before school three days per week During the school day During the school day HoughtonMifflin Small Group 9 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Classroom Performance Task Teacher's recommendation Parent request Data At Risk Counseling, Small Group and One to One Throughout the school day Check in and Check out Program, Individual Support Plan 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 16 students in a shelter 16 Double up 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  At Risk Counseling  Mentors  Additional support in ELA and Math  School Supplies Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Baychester Academy's hiring committee created an interview protocol to ensure that new employees core beliefs are aligned to the school's mission and vision.  Maintain a rigorous hiring process, which includes interview, demo lesson, and background check  Build capacity among our teachers by providing leadership opportunities  Teachers have the opportunity to participate on various teams (data, child study, grade leader,  Baychester Academy hiring team conduct interviews and observe demonstration lessons.  Teachers are given tailored professional development and resources to improve practice  New teachers are assigned a mentor that will support them throughout the school year  Teachers work closely with ELA and Math consultants. Consultants offer professional development, planning sessions and coaching to all teachers.  Administrators serve as a mentor and a coach for new teachers  Teachers have the opportunity to visit their colleagues to observe best practices  Administrator conduct frequent observations and provide timely actionable feedback and clear next steps  Teachers have several common planning time with grade team, they also meet on vertical teams 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 1. Teachers attend in house professional development sessions, studying the ELA and Math CCLS. 2. At the conclusion of the observation-feedback cycle, teachers are offered differentiated professional development tailored to their needs. 3. Literacy and Math consultants provide targeted professional development and classroom support visits to support teachers in implementing the Common Core aligned curricula. 4. Teacher teams attend curriculum based trainings and turnkey the information to the staff. 5. Administrators schedule inter-class visits for teachers to observe best pedagogical practices. 3  6. Teacher teams meet daily (during their preparation period) to plan common core aligned ELA and Math units and lessons. The AIS and SETSS teachers work with the grade teams to ensure that all of the learners needs are being met. 7. The Grade Leaders support their assigned grades in planning and sharing teaching practices that have been successful. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Parents of Pre-K students are invited in for an informational meeting in May/June. At this time they are given information on how to prepare your child for the school year. In early September, all kindergarten and Pre- K parents are asked to attend an orientation. At this event teachers explain the expectations of the grade and give an overview of what the students are expected to learn by June. Throughout the year parents are invited to attend workshops, offered by the parent coordinator. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The Measures of Student learning Team (MOSL) was established in June 2013. The team is comprised of the UFT chapter leader, the three administrators, and classroom and cluster teachers. The team reviewed several research based assessments and made selections based on the needs of our school and students. Professional Development on how to implement these assessments began during the August retreat and continues monthly. The MOSL/Data team meets biweekly to analyze the assessments and results. This data is presented to the staff during professional development sessions and grade team meetings. The team also analyzes the NYS ELA and Math exam to identify power standards. The team created and presented a document that highlighted the implications for teaching. The 4  Grade Leaders work closely with the MOSL/Data team to ensure that the grade teams are aware of all implications for their teaching. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $330,000.00 $95,000.00 0 3,000 $73,000.00 (X) (X) (X) (X) (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 5  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Baychester Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Baychester Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in the planning  and decision making in support of their children's education Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress  Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments  Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community 8  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  Have a parent coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office  Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g.,ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions;   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help  Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 9  Hosting an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference  Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee Supporting or hosting Family Day events   Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library, instructional materials for parents  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Baychester Academy, ], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum  Using academic learning time effectively and efficiently  Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences   Offering high quality instruction in all content areas  Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and if this does not occur, parents will be notified as implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how the Compact is related;  Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 0   Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting;  Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact   Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents  Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member  Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities  Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians  Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents   Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy  Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs  Ensure that my child attends school every day and on time. In the event my child is absent follow the II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities appropriate procedures to inform the school  Assist and review my child's homework  Read to my child every night and discuss the critical questions about the book.   Discuss the parent compact with my child to follow school rules and regulations Limit to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games 1   Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits  Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested  Be involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision of the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible  Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams;  Partner with the school in for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: Follow the school rules and be responsible for one's actions  Attend school every day and on time  Complete homework and submit all assignments on time   Respect self, peers, adults and school property  Resolve conflicts to prevent escalation  Focus on each task 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Baychester Academy Borough Bronx School Number 169 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Cristine Vaughan Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sandra DeSantis Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Gina Trandiak Related-Service Provider Karen Wade Superintendent Meisha Ross Porter Assistant Principal K. Gardner, J. Lawrence Coach School Counselor Tonya Arnold Parent Requel Russell-George Parent Coordinator Sharon Johnson Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 416 3 Total number of ELLs 16 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 3.85%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we employ a variety of assessments. Emergent readers are assessed on concepts of print, letters, and sounds. Students are also given Fountas and Pinnell running records and coordinating comprehension questions. The F&P assessment is administered in English. The data gathered from the F&P assessments allows us to know where to drive our instruction based upon current levels of student achievement. Using these results, students are divided into guided reading groups that meet at least one time per week. Students are re-assessed informally to measure growth. This assessment targets accuracy, fluency, and comprehension. Small group instruction assists children in strengthening their comprehension and fluency. All students are also assessed using the iReady online diagnostic assessment in both ELA and Math. The baseline results of these assessments have indicated that students must continue to develop vocabulary and comprehension skills, and some students are struggling with phonics. The ENL teacher can access the iReady results of the ELLs and print various reports to 4  help develop instruction. For students struggling with phonics, for example, the ENL teacher will create lessons to target this need especially in the standalone setting for Entering and Emerging students. All teachers use this iReady data to form groups and differentiate their whole-class instruction. Teachers also utilize whole-class discussions and partner work in order to benefit the ELL students by providing them with peer support. Modifications are also considered when providing assessments, such as separate location and additional time. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The Fountas & Pinnell assessments are conducted usually once per marking period (approximately four times per year). The iReady assessments are administered three times per year in September, January, and May. All teachers and administrators are involved in the process, scheduling and honoring accommodations for ELLs and students with special needs. School aides and technology support assist with the logistics of using laptops to complete the tasks. When these assessments are complete and classroom teachers receive the results, they are expected to enter the students' performance data into a Google Sheet created and maintained by the school's Data Team. All teachers are given access to this live document and can identify areas of strength and need. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Students’ performance on the NYSESLAT is the main factor in determining the success of our program for ELLs. For those ELL students in grades 3 through 5, a score of 3 or better on the NYS ELA and Mathematics exams is also considered success. In examining the results of the May 2016 NYSESLAT, of the students who did not move a proficiency level, progress was still made when viewing the raw score of each modality. Additionally, the success of our program is measured when looking at NYS ELA and Mathematics exams, Fountas & Pinnell, running records, writing data, student report cards, and achievement toward grade level learning standards. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher meets with the principal to discuss the results and devise a plan of action. The ENL teacher then shares the results, the needs, and some corresponding strategies with classroom teachers of ELLs. According to the May 2015 NYSESLAT scores, for example, many students scored low on the listening modality of the exam. During a meeting with the principal, the decision to increase listening practice was made and implemented during the 2016-2017 school year. The school's Data Team also works to compile and analyze the results of all assessments given. This team discusses the possible reasons as to why the students scored as they did. The Data Team may also present some of their findings to the classroom teachers as a whole and, in turn, discuss with them the possible reasons for the scores and ways to improve instruction. All teachers are then expected to continue to conversation during common planning times. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school's Child Study Team meets regularly two times per month to discuss the needs of specific students. Instruction for all ELLs is provided at the Tier I instructional level with the ELL teacher and classroom teacher collaborating on lessons targeted at increasing language acquisition and academic proficiency. When data from formal and informal assessments by both ELL and classroom teachers indicate an intense need for intervention, students are placed at Tier 2 or Tier 3 levels as needed. Instruction at these Tiers is tailored to meet ELLs’ language and academic needs and specific modalities in which they are at risk. Students are provided with increasingly intensive, targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs. These needs are determined by individual students’ performance on periodically administered assessments. 5  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels reveal that students are achieving English proficiency at a consistent rate. The scores they received on the 2016 NYSESLAT mostly correlate to their performance on the NYS ELA and Math exams as well as on school-based formative and informal assessments. After reviewing the NYSITELL, the data revealed the majority of our new ELLs were Entering in the 2016-2017 school year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Administrators share the assessment scores with all teachers. The results are often organized and analyzed according to the Common Core Learning Standard related to the exam task so that teachers may see which standard may require more direct instruction or more practice for mastery. The school's Data Team also plays a role in analyzing the results and trends across grades, cohorts, and the whole school. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Baychester Academy uses mostly an integrated ENL model to deliver language services to ELL students. ELL students are grouped together in their classrooms, and the ENL and classroom teachers collaborate weekly to make the same ELA and Math curriculum accessible to each ELL according to their proficiency levels. The ENL teacher both differentiates instruction and facilitates the group by following the content taught by the classroom teacher. The students are often heterogeneously grouped in this setting. Baychester Academy utilizes the standalone ENL model for students at the Entering and Emerging levels (in addition to their integrated minutes) as per the CR Part 154.2. These students are grouped by grade band (examples: grades 1-2, grades 4-5) and the ENL teacher works with these small groups to deliver language instruction. This instruction is aligned to the Common Core State Standards and related to the classroom content in all subject areas. It is explored at a level appropriate for beginning ELL students. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The certified ENL teacher is able to meet the mandates of every ELL at Baychester Academy. The mandates are met through a combination of mostly integrated services and some standalone services when necessary (for Entering and Emerging students in addition to their integrated services). Students who scored Entering or Emerging receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. Students who placed at Transitioning or Expanding levels receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction weekly. Students who 6  placed at the Commanding level receive 90 minutes per week of transitional services for two years. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. To make content comprehensible and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, the certified ENL teacher works with classroom teachers to deliver accessible and rigorous instruction for ELLs. The curriculum encompasses content standards and language objectives to provide students with a language-rich, comprehensible curriculum to foster language development while aligning with the CCLS. Additionally, students at Baychester Academy are exposed to a literacy-rich curriculum, developed by both the ReadyGen and Expeditionary Learning programs. Grade-appropriate materials and content are taught through scaffolded instruction, methods of ENL instruction, and collaborative learning. As a means to help support students within their classroom, the ENL teacher works closely with classroom teachers to follow themes and lessons being taught while "pushing-in" during integrated instruction. Students are exposed to authentic grade texts and materials, as well as the explicit teaching of reading and writing strategies in addition to problem-solving strategies that will aid ELLs in meeting the standards of local and state assessments. Metacognition is weaved into daily instruction as students are encouraged to engage and monitor their own learning experience and to be cognizant of strategies and tools that will best support their learning. Furthermore, additional support, besides that which is provided through ELL instruction, is available for students. Eligible students may receive assistance in Speech and Language, Wilson Reading System, Fundations, and needs-targeted small group math instruction. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Baychester Academy offers neither a transitional bilingual program nor a dual language program at this time. Incoming students with Spanish as their home language are given the Spanish LAB as an initial identification of their proficiency. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status The individual needs of each student are met through differentiated instruction as described below: a. There are currently no SIFE at Baychester Academy. However, if our population included SIFE, we would implement additional instructional support, specifically targeted to meet the needs of these students. Additional instructional support might include in-class scaffolds and differentiation, literacy intervention, small-group math instruction, guided reading instruction, Wilson Reading System, and Fundations. b. ELL students who have been in U.S. schools for less than three years will receive ENL services (integrated) as well as small group instruction from their classroom teachers. These students may also be eligible for AIS. The ENL teacher works to deliver communicative, academic, and cultural instruction using visual aids and multisensory approaches during both integrated and standalone services. c. Students who have been receiving ENL for 4-6 years will receive AIS support. The ENL teacher also works with developing academic and social during both integrated and standalone services via visual and multisensory approaches. d. There are presently no Long-Term ELLs at Baychester Academy. However, if our population included Long-Term ELLs, we 7  would analyze recent NYSESLAT scores and other forms of assessment to identify areas and modalities of concern. Once identified, we would compose an instructional plan to help support the student(s) in the specific areas of need. e. All parents of former ELLs are immediately notified of the change in ELL status. All families receive transitional service letters. Former ELL students continue to receive services and testing accommodations for two years. Additionally, they are classified on data reports so teachers will be aware of their unique learning needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Identified ELL-SWDs receive individualized academic support both within and outside of the classroom. Scaffolded instruction is tailored to the needs of each student. The specific needs of each student and best practices of instruction reflect those outlined on students’ Individualized Education Plan (IEP). Classroom teachers and the ENL teacher work closely together to provide best instructional strategies and to help maintain instructional consistency inside and outside of the mainstream classroom. These practices provide access to content areas in addition to accelerating ELL-SWDs' language development. Such instructional strategies and grade-level materials include: adapted materials, small group instruction, repeated directions, the use of visuals, modified directions, etc. Our ENL and special education teachers work together to provide each student with the appropriate content and instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, our ENL teacher and related service providers work closely to avoid scheduling conflicts. Students are provided with extra materials and visuals to assist in content comprehension. They are given extra time to complete their tasks and are arranged in small groups so that they can receive individual assistance. They are provided with grade-level material in smaller parts that are differentiated to meets their special needs as identified on their IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. To meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment, our ENL teacher and related service providers work closely to avoid scheduling conflicts. Students are provided with extra materials and visuals to assist in content comprehension. They are given extra time to complete their tasks and are grouped in small groups so that they can receive individual assistance. They are provided with grade-level material in smaller parts that are differentiated to meet their special needs as identified on their IEPs. When deemed appropriate through meetings and discussions with classroom teachers and providers, students whose progress is minute will receive AIS. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the upcoming school year, an enhanced emphasis on nonfiction curriculum will be continue to be implemented. As a means for students to gain content, vocabulary, and language skills, most units will be focused on nonfiction and/or current events. This will enable students to achieve the vocabulary and skills necessary for various language activities. Types of literature to which students are to will also be expanded this year. Students will interact with audio books, newspapers, magazines, the Internet, and various forms of literature. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 8  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students at Baychester Academy are afforded equal access to all school programs. Baychester Academy boasts a wide array of enriching programs. All students have access to AIS as needed. All students at Baychester partake in chorus; and students in grades 4 and 5 have an opportunity to join orchestra, student government, and ballroom dancing. Students in grades 3 through 5 may participate in the Early Bird program for test preparation. Each year the entire school partakes in Penny Harvest. All ELLs are allotted in the same manner as other students and are always afforded equal access to all school programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Baychester Academy takes pride in its abundance of instructional materials. Baychester has an array of instructional materials including: SmartBoards in every classroom, iPods, iPads, a laptop cart, computers in classrooms, listening centers, audio libraries, word walls, literacy-rich games, and more. These instructional materials are available to all students, including ELLs, as a means to provide sound instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is an important component at Baychester Academy. All classroom libraries, as well as the main library and book room, boast a diverse array of bilingual materials. Such materials include bilingual dictionaries, books in students’ native language, and translated materials. All instruction at Baychester Academy is conducted in English. Native language is supported in the materials and as necessary for newcomers. Baychester, a culturally diverse community of learners, celebrates traditional holidays and cultural events to honor culture through songs, poems, and materials. To help support parents, all written material sent home is translated when necessary and according to the parents' preferred language as noted at the start of the school year. Meetings with families are routinely held and interpretation services are available as needed. A list of bilingual staff is kept on hand in our school’s ELL Compliance Binder as a means to know which staff can provide language services to our families in need of native language support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Our ENL teacher works to ensure that all required services and resources correspond with ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELLs are grouped together by grade level. Within each group, the teacher differentiates and provides small group instruction based on present levels of performance and, in turn, provides level-appropriate resources incorporating grade-level content. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly-enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year, our school hosts a Meet and Greet each year to allow students to meet their teachers and tour the school prior to the first day. Additionally, before enrollment, each new family is offered a tour to assist in the transition of attending to a new school. Interpretation services are provided when necessary. Throughout the year we have a host of enriching activities, open to all students and families such as Curriculum Night, Family Fun Day, Math Night, Literacy Night, Save Halloween, and Movie Night. The parent coordinator, social worker, volunteer teachers, and administrators are involved in these events. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently there are no official language electives offered to any students at Baychester Academy. 9  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Baychester Academy does not have a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our school’s ENL teacher attends ELL Professional Development meetings when offered through the BFSC as well as the monthly ELL Liaison Meetings held within the district. Additionally, she partakes in webinars and various continuing education opportunities as they arise. All classroom teachers of ELLs have equal opportunity to attend professional developments, many of which are specific to teaching ELLs. Additionally, our ENL teacher turnkeys information from PDs during Monday and/or Tuesday extended days. The ENL teacher receives information about upcoming PD opportunities from the principal, the NYC DOE's ELL Newsletter, and the United Federation of Teachers (UFT) bulletins. Teachers of ELLs, including classroom teachers and the ENL teacher, are offered ample opportunity to attend professional development for ELLs. Many of the professional development opportunities offered are geared toward making the Common Core Learning Standards accessible for ELLs. Additionally, all teachers work with staff developers and consultants to support ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. Expeditionary Learning consultants in Math and English Language Arts are scheduled throughout the school year to provide information and practice opportunities during professional learning time on extended days (Mondays). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers partake in professional development focusing on the topic of English Language Learners to ensure their hours of ELL training are fulfilled. Furthermore, additional professional development opportunities are offered. Teachers are required to submit agendas and participation certificates which are stored in teachers’ files. The ENL teacher shares ELL-specific opportunities to teachers when available. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Annually, the ENL teacher conducts individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss the goals of the program, language development progress toward proficiency, and next steps for the student. Present at these meetings are the ENL teacher, the 0  family, and an interpreter if necessary. Parents will sign an attendance sheet and all records of student progress will be kept at school and a copy will be sent to parents. The ENL teacher also makes an effort to meet simultaneously with the classroom teacher and the parents/guardians of ELLs during the four conference days scheduled each year. Additionally, all phone calls to parents will be logged. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Baychester Academy encourages and welcomes parental involvement in our school. Baychester ensures all ELL families receive related school information in both English and the family’s home language when necessary. Report cards, school information, and NYC DOE information is translated for parents. Meetings and conferences with parents are regularly held with interpretation services available. All parents at Baychester are actively involved in the education of their children. There are regular school-based workshops and celebrations for parents during which bilingual interpreters are available for parents of ELLs. Parents have the opportunity to attend these classroom celebrations and chaperon on field trips. Also, parents are encouraged to participate in Baychester’s PTA. The Parent Coordinator also works with the ENL teacher and alerts her of any need for interpreters or translated material for events and information. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Cristine Vaughan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Baychester Academy (PS 169) School DBN: 11X169 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Cristine Vaughan Title Principal K. Gardner, J. Lawrence Assistant Principal Sharon Johnson Parent Coordinator Sandra DeSantis ENL/Bilingual Teacher Requell Russell-George Parent Gina Trandiak Teacher/Subject Area Karen Wade Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Tonya Arnold School Counselor Meisha Ross Porter N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 6/27/2017 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x169 School Name: Baychester Academy Superintendent: M. Ross Porter The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sharon Johnson Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration, all parents complete a Home Language Intake Survey (HLIS) with a licensed pedagogue (the ENL teacher). If available via the interpreted Department of Education documents, the HLIS is provided in the home language when it is other than English. On this form, parents indicate their preferred language of both written and oral communication. The school maintains a list of bilingual staff members who can assist with translations and interpretations. Additionally, the school utilizes the Department of Education Translation and Interpretation Unit's over-the-phone interpretation services. After the home language has been identified on the HLIS, the information from the HLIS and the Emergency Contact cards is entered into ATS for documentation of the preferred language of communication. The ENL teacher also records parents' preferred language of communication in both digital and hard forms and shares it with classroom and other staff as necessary. When the ENL teacher meets with parents of ELLs individually, she assesses and discusses this preference and any changes the parent would like to make regarding communication. The ENL teacher updates and again shares this information with other teachers and staff as appropriate. 4  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish Arabic French English 4 3 3 3 8% 6% 6% 6% 3 2 3 4 6% 4% 6% 8% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. This is not applicable for Baychester Academy at this time. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families registration, application, and selection forms March-August and rolling as needed New York State testing information in the spring March Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Forms will be provided in parents' preferred language. Most forms have been previously translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit and are kept on hand within the school (main office and ENL teacher). In the event that a parent prefers a language for which a form has not yet been translated, the ENL teacher will submit a request to the T&I Unit, utilizing either an over-the-phone or in-person interpreter to communicate the message in the meantime. Letters will be provided in parents' preferred language. A template letter has been previously translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit and is updated by the ENL teacher with each year's current information. In the event that a parent prefers a 5  special education and related services, transfers and discharges as needed school calendar and notices of school closings as needed language for which the letter has not yet been translated, the ENL teacher will submit a request to the T&I Unit, utilizing either an over-the-phone or in-person interpreter to communicate the message in the meantime. Service providers distributing these notices are given the information for the Translation and Interpretation Unit at the start of each school year and may submit requests as necessary. The ENL teacher will provide support as needed. Notices will be provided in parents' preferred language. Most notices have been previously translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit and are kept on hand within the school (main office and ENL teacher). In the event that a parent prefers a language for which a notice has not yet been translated, the ENL teacher will submit a request to the T&I Unit, utilizing either an over-the-phone or in-person interpreter to communicate the message in the meantime. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Family Conferences (November, March, and May) October, February, and April (approximately one month prior to each conference date) interpretation service(s)? Notices will be provided in parents' preferred language. A template letter has been previously translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit and is updated by the ENL teacher with each conference's information. In the event that a parent prefers a language for which a form has not yet been translated, the ENL teacher will submit a request to the T&I Unit, utilizing either an over-the-phone or in-person interpreter to communicate the message in the meantime. 6  Curriculum Night September Math Nights September-November Literacy Nights September-November During the actual conference, if a bilingual staff member is available, he/she will be asked to interpret for the parent and teacher. If such a person is unavailable, the teacher will call for and utilize the over-the-phone interpretation services. For parents who prefer an in-person interpreter ahead of time and for lower-incidences, arrangements will be made via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. The teacher giving the presentation will call for and utilize the over-the-phone interpretation services. For parents who have responded ahead of time that they are attending, an attempt will be made to provide in-person interpretation. The teacher giving the presentation will call for and utilize the over-the-phone interpretation services. For parents who have responded ahead of time that they are attending, an attempt will be made to provide in-person interpretation. The teacher giving the presentation will call for and utilize the over-the-phone interpretation services. For parents who have responded ahead of time that they are attending, an attempt will be made to provide in-person interpretation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, the over-the-phone interpretation service can be utilized. Interpreters can call the family using their three-way calling system that allows the school staff to communicate effectively with the parent. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 7  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The start of each school year begins with an overview of the Chancellor's Regulations. The ENL teacher will ensure that A-663 is included in that list and distribute translation and interpretation information for every teacher every September. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..)  The Welcome Poster is in the main office.  Parents are given the Bill of Rights at registration.  Parents' Guide to Language Access is provided at registration.   Language ID Guide is kept at both the security desk and the main office. Information about notification translations available via the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site is shared with teachers and staff. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Baychester Academy deeply understands the value of feedback. Our parent coordinator works diligently to consistently assess the needs of our parents through written surveys on the quality and availability of services, both in English and the home language of our English Language Learners. Additionally, our parents are often surveyed to assess their needs as a means to gather information about parent workshops and learning series. 8 
