 09X204 School Name: P.S. 204 MORRIS HEIGHTS Principal: AMANDA BLATTER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: MORRIS HEIGHTS 32090010204 PREK-5 School Number (DBN): 09X204 School Address: 1780 DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING JR. BLVD. BRONX, N.Y. 10453 Phone Number: 718-960-9520 Fax: 718-960-9629 School Contact Person: AMANDA BLATTER Email Address: ABLATTE2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 9 Superintendent’s Office Address: AMANDA BLATTER BERNADETTE ALEXANDER VeronicaAyala MarielleFratarcangeli N/A N/A NA District Information LETICIA RODRIGUEZ-ROSARIO Superintendent: 55 ST PAUL PLACE, BRONX, NT Lrosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 917-763-3144 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-410-7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address:   Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828 7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name AMANDA BLATTER BERNADETTE ALEXANDER VERONICA AYALA VERONICAAYALA MARIA SANDOVAL KAREN RUIZ Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/PARENT Member/PARENT   Josephine Melendez Cynthia Cruz Jennifer Zinser Wilson John Barbour Marielle Fratarcangeli Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/PARENT Member/PARENT Member/ TEACHER Member/TEACHER Member/TEACHER Member/PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission: Section 4: CEP Overview PS204 community will cultivate a collaborative learning environment that promotes perseverance and inspires the love of learning.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Context: PS204 is situated in the South Bronx with a population of 634. We have 440 Hispanic students, 176 Black, 7 Asian, 1 American Indian/Alaskan, 4 white and 1 multiracial students attending the school this year. Of this student population there are 78 English Language Learners (ELLs) and 116 Students With Disabilities (SWDs.) Strategic Collaborations: PS204 partners with a CBO includes the following:  ‘Directions For Our Youth’ (DFOY) which provides families with an after school program. They offer a variety of services for students including homework help, arts enrichment and supports. ‘Dancing Classrooms’ provides instruction in ballroom dancing to students in grades 4 and 5.   A full time music teacher provides music instruction which integrates literacy, dance and music.  ‘Studio-in-a-School’ provides visual arts instruction for all students. Residencies include instruction in two and three dimensional explorations using various art media. Art exhibitions allow students to present their work to the public.  A’ Disney Musical Grant’ offers students the opportunity to participate in producing a Disney musical theater  program. ‘Teachers College’, Columbia University provide consultancy support for reading and writing with 10 days for K-2 teachers, involving individual coaching and Lab Sites 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 125 of the 634 students are in temporary housing. 20% Special Education, 12% ELL Students, Universal free lunch 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 4% Percentage of students achieving proficiency by Grade in NYS Math 2018: 3rd grade – 54.3%, 4th grade – 49.1%, 5th grade – 42.2% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  28% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9% 0  43% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 1%  50% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  54% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  51% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 4%  15% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 6%  44% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  56% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 14%  49% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  57% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 2% School Quality Guide 2017-18 Average of Responses: Effective: 1.2 Highly Effective: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1 Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP Rating and Score 2017-18 Score 92/100, therefore Highly Effective Strengths: Teachers have become an integral part in decision making around the ELA curriculum with the support of the Teachers College Curriculum, and the Special Education Team. We have implemented the phonics program of Orton Gillingham and Fundations to provide support for our early childhood and struggling readers. Teachers College Up the Ladder resources supports differentiation of instruction especially for our English Language Learners and struggling readers. In Mathematics we have a K-5 Math Coach to support grade teams to refine their practice through the collection and analysis of student assessment. Targeted interventions are data based and are tracked for impact, for instance I-Ready and Math Simulation data informs next steps and is used to inform guided and intervention groups. Challenges: 1  To continue to build students’ ability to engage in authentic discussions we need to have teachers require students to demonstrate the integration of feedback into their work. This requires us to deepen students’ ability to use tools to self and peer assess. Additionally, we will need to use similar structures to support student’s ability to self-regulate their social behaviors. To continue to extend our performance in meeting our goals in terms of ‘Academic Rigor’ and ‘Teacher Collaboration’ we can develop a cohesive grade level academic language base. In reference to these elements of the Framework for Great Schools our goals are designed to continue to support higher achievement for all students and particularly our student sub-groups. As well, we are focused on deepening rigor in literary and mathematics and developing a deeper understanding of the language demands in all subject areas. Our professional development, collaborative planning and rigorous instruction will work to ensure every student makes progress. To continue to strengthen school/family partnerships to support a vibrant culture and success for all – the specific element within the Framework for Great Schools is ‘Strong Family Ties.’ 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X204 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 630 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 52 52 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 44 38 28 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 84.4% % Reduced Lunch 11.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 70.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 53.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 91% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 54 53 92.7% 0.8% 21.6% 26.5% 1.9% 0.6% 4 5% 4.7 52.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A YES YES YES N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 4% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2017:  28% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  43% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 1%  50% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  54% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  51% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 4%  15% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 6%  44% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  56% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 14%  49% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  57% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 2% School Quality Guide 2017-18 Average of Responses: 4  Effective: 1.2 Highly Effective: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1 2017-18 School Survey Response Rates Parents 89% (444) Teachers 98% (44) Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP Rating and Score 2017-18, Score 97/100, therefore Highly Effective Strengths: 2017‐2018 school status was determined by 2016 NYS tests. 2017‐2018 School Standing: Good Standing We are very proud of the achievement of PS204 within the Framework for Great Schools, especially the elements of ‘Rigorous Instruction’ and ‘Effective School Leadership’ where we have demonstrated Proficiency levels when compared with Average Citywide achievements: Challenges: To continue to build students’ ability to engage in authentic discussions we need to have teachers require students to demonstrate the integration of feedback into their work. This requires us to deepen students’ ability to use tools to self and peer assess. Additionally, we will need to use similar structures to support student’s ability to self-regulate their social behaviors. To continue to extend our performance in meeting our goals in terms of ‘Academic Rigor’ and ‘Teacher Collaboration’ we can develop a cohesive grade level academic language base. In reference to these elements of the Framework for Great Schools our goals are designed to continue to support higher achievement for all students and particularly our student sub-groups. To continue to strengthen school/family partnerships to support a vibrant culture and success for all – the specific element within the Framework for Great Schools is ‘Strong Family Ties.’ To focus on deepening rigor in literary and mathematics and developing a deeper understanding of the language demands in all subject areas. Our professional development, collaborative planning and rigorous instruction will work to ensure every student makes progress. In this way we will have a continued emphasis on improving planning and instruction to provide the best possible support for improved outcomes for our subgroups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 1: BY JUNE 2019 we will increase the percentage of Grades 2-5 students that meet or exceed their target growth (one year’s worth of growth) based on the I-Ready Growth Report in Reading, from 64% in June 2017 to 66% in June 2019 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. At PS204 we will: - begin by recording and analyzing all available data including NYS test data, baseline iReady, Writing MOSEL, TC Independent Reading - provide feedback to groups and individual students that is accurate and specific - help students set learning goals based on timely the actionable feedback we will provide - share findings with all members of the grade team, including the Universal Literacy Coach, ESL and SETTS teacher - co-plan strategies and lessons to differentiate for the individual, groups and whole class learning needs 2. Teachers will conduct individual and group conferences to help them to continuously monitor student understanding so as to provide high quality feedback that is specific and focused 1. Our school has been selected to set up a Gifted and Talented 3rd grade class. 2nd grades across the district will be identified through i-Reading and the MOSEL performance task 2. G&T teacher will provide grade level CCLS curricula that will: - include planned enrichment and extension activities and processes explain content clearly and imaginatively, using metaphors and analogies to bring content to life - invite students to explain the content to their classmates Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers, all students Sept.'18-Oct.'19 Instructional Leaders, Grade teams, Support Teachers Instructional leaders, Teacher Team Grades 2 Sept.'18- June'19 6  - encourage students to suggest other strategies they might - use in approaching a challenge or analysis use rich language, offering brief vocabulary lessons where appropriate, both for general vocabulary and for the discipline. - require students to use academic language correctly. 1. The special education team will provide support for specific teachers including the Spec Ed. Teacher and AIS teacher, to help target students performing below grade level All Teachers Grades 2-5 Sept.'18- June'19 Instructional leaders, Teachers 2. All students who are new to the school and have IEPs, will be provided with additional support to assist them with the necessary decoding skills, that our assessments show, they may be missing. To do this we will use the Wilson and Fundations programs. 3. The outcome will help determine all the students that should be targeted for small group pull out or push in. 4. Teachers will coach targeted students to provide opportunities for exploration of concepts and engage in guided practice. 1. For improved reading outcomes we have a school wide focus on actively encouraging student-led discussions and to require students to justify their opinions by citing text evidence. Teacher Teams, All students, ELL's 2. All teacher teams will plan open ended questions to prompt discussion, especially for small group guided reading 3. We plan to hold After school program for ELL’s preparation for the NYSESLAT 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Sept.'18- June.'19 Instructional leaders,All Teacher teams, ESL Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will ensure that Parents and Family will be invited to participate in: -Curricula workshops, especially how to help your child at home 7  -Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays -Open house events, such as Meet the Teacher, Coffee and Conversation and Parent Teacher sessions -Invitations to classroom celebrations such as publishing parties and culminating activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Master Schedule programming to allow up to periods a week of common planning for all teachers - Reading Consultant, TC PD off campus and inschool - Funding for resources and the TC units of study - Additional non-fiction and fiction leveled texts - Per session funding for 3 teachers for targeted After School program - Funding for parent outreach and curricula workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - Compare the percentage of i-Ready Growth Report in Reading, from September 2018 to June 2019 - Percentage increase overall in the T.C. Running Records Independent Reading Levels in February 2019 - SDC minutes from their bi-monthly meetings - Minutes from Cabinet meetings Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) February 2019 Benchmark Reporting on progress: i-Ready Above Average for September 2018 I-Ready Above Average for January 2019 i-Ready At Average for September 2018 8  i-Ready At Average for January 2019 Combined At and Above for September 2018 Combined At and Above for January 2019 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Grade 2: Progress 77%, Percentage Met 33%, Percentage Students with Improved Placement 44% Grade 3: Progress 105%, Percentage Met 52%, Percentage Students with Improved Placement 57% Grade 4: Progress 63%, Percentage Met 42%, Percentage Students with Improved Placement 40% Grade 5: Progress 121%, Percentage Met 60%, Percentage Students with Improved Placement 60% 2018-2019 Reading i-Ready Growth Report, our Progress Towards Annual Typical Growth so far this year (winter) is 70%. We are on track to meet this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 4% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  28% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  43% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 1%  50% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  54% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  51% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 4%  15% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 6%  44% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  56% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 14%  49% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  57% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 2% School Quality Guide 2017-18 Average of Responses: Effective: 1.2 Highly Effective: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1 0  2017-18 School Survey Response Rates Parents 89% (444) Teachers 98% (44) Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP Rating and Score 2017-18), Score 97/100, therefore Highly Effective Strengths: 2017‐2018 school status was determined by 2016 NYSED tests. 2017‐2018 School Standing: Good Standing We are very proud of the achievement of PS204 within the Framework for Great Schools, especially the elements of ‘Rigorous Instruction’ and ‘Effective School Leadership’ where we have demonstrated Proficiency levels when compared with Average Citywide achievements Challenges: To continue to build students’ ability to engage in authentic discussions, we need to create opportunities for discussion around content area topics. This requires us to deepen students’ ability to use tools to self and peer assess. Additionally, we will need to use similar structures to support student’s ability to self-regulate their social behaviors when engaging in conversations with one another. To continue to extend our performance in meeting our goals in terms of ‘Academic Rigor’ and ‘Teacher Collaboration’ we can develop grade level academic vocabulary and integrate the Language standards. In reference to these elements of the Framework for Great Schools our goals are designed to continue to support higher achievement for all students and particularly our student sub-groups. To focus on deepening rigor in literary and mathematics and developing a deeper understanding of the language demands in all subject areas. Our professional development, collaborative planning and rigorous instruction will work to ensure every student makes progress. In this way we will have a continued emphasis on improving planning and instruction to provide the best possible support for improved outcomes for our subgroups. To continue an emphasis on a school-wide comprehensive and cohesive approach to discipline that has a variety of appropriate consequences for students – in terms of the elements of Framework for Great schools this goal represents ‘Supportive School Environment’. While we address both the academic and the social emotional needs of our students with systems and structures embedded across the school to ensure students’ needs are met, and some staff have been trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention strategies, we need to use a range of strategies to support student self- regulation and RULER training will need to be used to support this. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 1  Goal 2: By June 2019, all students and staff will participate in comprehensive social/emotional education resulting in a 2.5% reduction in the number of referrals to RTI for social emotional issues. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. We will introduce R.U.L.E.R, the anchors of emotional intelligence. -Recognition of emotions - Understanding emotions - Labelling emotions - Expressing emotions - Regulating emotions Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All staff Oct.'18- June'19 Instructional Leaders, Social Worker 2. Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence has a training and implementation program and nominees from PS204 have received the training and have undertaken to provide professional development for all staff in 2018-19 during Monday PD 1. We will concentrate on strengthening links with such outside organizations and resources as: Targeted students Sept.'18- June'19 - Child Mind Institute provides professional development on behavior techniques and understanding and responding to childhood trauma and effects of poverty - Haven Academy Charter School Training - Behavior Intervention Manual- Hawthorne Educational Services - The Center for Health Equity - Bronx Neighborhood Health Action Center will provide workshops to promote social and emotional health in collaboration with our full time Social Worker and Guidance Counsellor. We will conduct workshops to inform parents and community about these systems being put in place and to encourage an Administration, Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor, RTI Team, Teachers Related Service Providers, Parents, Counselor 3  open dialogue with members of the school community about how they may support this goal, both at home and at school Continue with the highly successful student government with representatives from 3rd, 4th and 5th grade classrooms. The student government promotes student voice, student decision making, and teaches principles of leadership We will conduct workshops to inform parents and community about these systems being put in place and to encourage an open dialogue with members of the school community about how they may support this goal, both at home and at school 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students Sept.18- June'19 Instructional leaders, Student government facilitator Parents and community Sept.'18- June'19 Parent Coordinator, Instructional leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will ensure that Parents and Family will be invited to participate in: -Curricula workshops, especially how to help your child at home -Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays -Open house events, such as Meet the Teacher, Coffee and Conversation and Parent Teacher sessions -Invitations to classroom celebrations such as publishing parties and culminating activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - B.E.A.R.S. Awards, Certificates - Materials for effective communication - Bulletin Board Presentations - Parent Coordinator - Scheduling ‘ Parent Engagement Periods’ - Resources for ‘ Coffee and Conversation’ in the ‘ Parent’s Room’ Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 4  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - Minutes, agendas and attendance sheets for RTI meetings - Record of number of referrals to RTI and the associated reasons for these - Attendance sign-in at Parent Engagement Periods - School Survey 2018-2019 (Parents and Teachers) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February Benchmark Report for Goal 2: We will record the specific reduction in students bought to R.T.I. for social emotional issues, to determine if we are on track to meet this goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Based on the data, we need to revise our goal due to the numbers of students who were newly admitted to the school who required RTI for social-emotional needs. Of the 11 students referred to RTI for Social-Emotional support, 9 were new admits (representing 82% of the total RTI cases for social emotional needs), In addition – new admits represent the majority of the overall referred to RTI. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 4% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2017:  28% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  43% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 1%  50% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  54% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  51% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 School Quality Guide 2017-18 Average of Responses: Effective: 1.2 Highly Effective: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1 2017-18 School Survey Response Rates Parents 89% (444) Teachers 98% (44) Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP Rating and Score 2017-18 Score 97/100, therefore Highly Effective 6  Strengths: 2017‐2018 school status was determined by 2016 NYSED tests. 2017‐2018 School Standing: Good Standing. We are very proud of the achievement of PS204 within the Framework for Great Schools, especially the elements of ‘Rigorous Instruction’ and ‘Effective School Leadership’ where we have demonstrated Proficiency levels when compared with Average Citywide achievements. To continue to build students’ ability to engage in authentic discussions, we need to create opportunities for discussion around content area topics. This requires us to deepen students’ ability to use tools to self and peer assess. Additionally, we will need to use similar structures to support student’s ability to self-regulate their social behaviors when engaging in conversations with one another. To continue to extend our performance in meeting our goals in terms of ‘Academic Rigor’ and ‘Teacher Collaboration’ we can develop a cohesive grade level academic language base. In reference to these elements of the Framework for Great Schools our goals are designed to continue to support higher achievement for all students and particularly our student sub-groups. To continue to strengthen school/family partnerships to support a vibrant culture and success for all – the specific element within the Framework for Great Schools is ‘Strong Family Ties.’ To focus on deepening rigor in literary and mathematics and developing a deeper understanding of the language demands in all subject areas. Our professional development, collaborative planning and rigorous instruction will work to ensure every student makes progress. In this way we will have a continued emphasis on improving planning and instruction to provide the best possible support for improved outcomes for our subgroups. To strengthen our collaborations across teams and between teams in planning instruction to ensure every student makes progress and the specific element within the Framework for Great Schools is ‘Collaborative Teachers’, particularly by conducting Lab sites around the 5 Mathematical Practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 3: By June 2019 we will have increased the percentage of Grades 2-5 students that will have achieved at least one year’s worth of growth based on the I-Ready Growth Report in Mathematics, from 63% in June 2018 to 65% in June 2019. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers Sept.18- June'19 Instructional Leaders, Grade teams Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Our Instructional leaders will refine the implementation of the ‘5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions’. They will conduct professional with grades 3-5 to provide teachers with more control over student-centered pedagogy. They do so by allowing the teacher to manage the content that will be discussed and how it will be discussed. Through careful planning, the amount of improvisation required by the teacher “in the moment” is kept to a minimum. 2. Teachers will be freed to participate in Lab Sites on strategies and to thoughtfully plan connections between different ways of solving problems. anticipating likely student responses to challenging mathematical tasks. Anticipating requires that teachers do the problem as many ways as they can monitoring students’ actual responses to the tasks (while students work on the tasks in pairs or small groups) Monitoring student responses involves paying close attention to students’ mathematical thinking and solution strategies as they work on the task. Selecting particular students to present their mathematical work during the whole-class discussion. The selection of particular students and their solutions is guided by the mathematical goal for the lesson and the teacher’s assessment of how each contribution will contribute to that goal. Thus, the teacher selects certain students to present because of the mathematics in their responses sequencing the student responses that will be displayed in a specific order. This ordering begins with the least sophisticated representation (a picture) of the least sophisticated strategy (scaling up by collecting sets) and ends with the most sophisticated strategy one another to develop powerful mathematical ideas. 1. Continue in Grades 2-5 with the GoMath supplementation using Eureka Math to ensure Grade level CCLS alignment All teachers Sept.'18- June'19 Instructional leaders, Math Coach, Grade teams 8  2. Eureka Math provides students with opportunities for critical thinking. 3. To optimize opportunities for our students to develop these skills our Mathematics Coach has worked with Kindergarten and grade 1 teams in the past. This year she will continue this work by extending the Eureka Math program into Grade 2 by supporting the team to understand the approach and to plan instruction accordingly 4. Grades 3-5 will be supported to plan mathematics instruction using the Eureka Mathematics 3-5 5. This year we plan to target After School program as enrichment for those students achieving at and above grade level. 1. Instructional Leaders provide guidance to assist grade teams to work together to examine all available student assessment information by grade, by class, and by student. All teachers Sept.'18- June'19 Instructional leaders, Math Coach, Grade 2 team We will;  Train new teachers on the use of i-Ready data to provide targeted support in Math  Ensure regular use of i-Ready in all classes K-5  Track i-Ready diagnostic data to monitor student performance and the refine out-of-class support teachers for students  Review i-Ready data as it becomes available and modify instruction programs accordingly, in collaboration with assistance of instructional leaders and the Math coach  Devise extension activities utilizing Engage NY/Eureka Math  Use process charts/checklists to support problem solving to ensure vertical cohesion  Access supplemental resources to support all students including ELLs and SWDs  Refine instruction that involves multiple entry points especially for our SWDs and ELLs  All classes conduct formative assessments to monitor progress including a prerequisite skills test and a pre and post for each unit  Utilize workable monitoring processes to track achievement toward student learning goals  We will use S.A.M.S. to monitor all available data, by grade, by class and by student  Examine student work and determine next instructional steps to strengthen student feedback that is immediately useful in helping student’s move to the next level of understanding. 9 Instructional leaders, Grade teams At PS204 we will: All teachers Sept.'18- June'19 -extend our use of process charts/checklists to support problem solving to ensure vertical cohesion - access supplemental resources to support all students including ELLs and SWDs - Refine instruction that involves multiple entry points especially for our SWDs and ELLs - All classes conduct formative assessments to monitor progress including a prerequisite skills test and a pre and post for each unit - Use S.A.M.S. to monitor all available data, by grade, by class and by student - Examine student work and determine next instructional steps to strengthen student feedback that is immediately useful in helping student’s move to the next level of understanding - Utilize workable monitoring processes to track achievement toward student learning goals - Writing in Math through explaining thinking ensure we have vertical and horizontal coherence - Plan to build rigor into the math programs, requiring fluency, applications and deep understanding - Build and refine a repertoire of forms of feedback, from both teacher and peers, that is accurate and specific and advances learning - Collaborate with our AIS Team to support targeted students that have been identified though the RTI process 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration will ensure that Parents and Family will be invited to participate in: -Curricula workshops, especially how to help your child at home -Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays 0  -Open house events, such as Meet the Teacher, Coffee and Conversation and Parent Teacher sessions -Invitations to classroom celebrations such as publishing parties and culminating activities. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Master Schedule programming to allow up to two periods a week of common planning for all teachers - Coaches - Consultants - Funding for resources for units of study (Go Math and Engage NY) - Additional math manipulatives - Per session funding for additional team planning - Funding for parent outreach and curricula workshop Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Review the extent to which students have improved based on the i-Ready Growth Report in Mathematics in January, February 2018 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February Benchmark Report for Goal 3: Percentage of Mathematics i-Ready Above Average for September, compared to January Percentage of Mathematics i-Ready Average for September, compared to January Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Grade 2: Progress 65%, Percentage Met 28%, Percentage Students with Improved Placement 39% Grade 3: Progress 70%, Percentage Met 25%, Percentage Students with Improved Placement 56% Grade 4: Progress 65%, Percentage Met 30%, Percentage Students with Improved Placement 58% Grade 5: Progress 60%, Percentage Met 31%, Percentage Students with Improved Placement 45% 2018-2019 Mathematics i-Ready Growth Report, our Progress Towards Annual Typical Growth so far this year (winter) is 59%. We are on track to meet this goal. 1  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017, the percentage of students achieving proficiency was 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math 4%. Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  28% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  43% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 1%  50% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  54% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  51% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 4%  15% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 6%  44% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  56% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 14%  49% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  57% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 2% School Quality Guide 2017-18 Average of Responses: Effective: 1.2 3  Highly Effective: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1 2017-18 School Survey Response Rates Parents 89% (444) Teachers 98% (44) Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP Rating and Score 2017-18 Score 97/100, therefore Highly Effective Strengths: 2017‐2018 school status was determined by 2016 NYSEDtests. 2017‐2018 School Standing: Good Standing We are very proud of the achievement of PS204 within the Framework for Great Schools, especially the elements of ‘Rigorous Instruction’ and ‘Effective School Leadership’ where we have demonstrated Proficiency levels when compared with Average Citywide achievements: Challenges: To continue to build students’ ability to engage in authentic discussions, we need to create opportunities for discussion around content area topics. This requires us to deepen students’ ability to use tools to self and peer assess. Additionally, we will need to use similar structures to support student’s ability to self-regulate their social behaviors when engaging in conversations with one another. To continue to extend our performance in meeting our goals in terms of ‘Academic Rigor’ and ‘Teacher Collaboration’ we can develop a cohesive grade level academic language base. In reference to these elements of the Framework for Great Schools our goals are designed to continue to support higher achievement for all students and particularly our student sub-groups. To continue to strengthen school/family partnerships to support a vibrant culture and success for all – the specific element within the Framework for Great Schools is ‘Strong Family Ties.’ To focus on deepening rigor in literary and mathematics and developing a deeper understanding of the language demands in all subject areas. Our professional development, collaborative planning and rigorous instruction will work to ensure every student makes progress. In this way we will have a continued emphasis on improving planning and instruction to provide the best possible support for improved outcomes for our subgroups. To nurture professional growth of teachers and strengthen teacher practice in all Danielson components for 2017-18 in planning and instruction and specifically Domain 3; to ensure every student makes progress - the specific element within the Framework for Great Schools is ‘Effective School Leadership.’ Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the 4  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 4: By June 2019 all teachers will plan lessons that focus on the reasoning exhibited by students in discussion that enables students to invite comments from their classmates during a discussion and challenge one another's thinking. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Sept.18-June'19 School LPP Team, Grade 5 Literacy Consultant 1. There will be a school-wide focus on developing Grade 5 strategies that encourage student-led discussions in whole class or small group settings. teachers 2. Our principal attended the LPP School Team Orientation this summer A grant for our Grade 5 teachers to participate in inter-visitation and teacher meetings at MS303 and the Highbridge Green School, for monthly visits (10.30am to 1.30pm) 3. PS204 will be involved in this interschool collaborative learning experiences to solve problems of practice around our shared learning focus area and to work towards a shared goal of increasing racial equity in participating LPP schools 4. We will receive additional resources from Learning Partners to get started on the LPP work, including our Cycles of Learning Tool. 1. There will be a review of Danielson 3b, including: Questions of high quality that cause students to think and reflect, to deepen their understanding, and to test their ideas against those of their classmates. When teachers ask questions of high quality, they ask only a few of them and provide students with sufficient time to think about their responses, to reflect on the comments of their classmates, and to deepen their understanding. 2. All teacher teams will plan open ended questions to prompt discussion especially for small group guided reading. All teachers Nov.'18 - June'19 Instructional Leaders, Teacher Teams 1. Teachers use questioning and discussion techniques to challenge students to examine their premises, to build a logical argument, and to critique the arguments of others.   All Teachers Sept.'18- June'19 Instructional leaders, Teacher Teams 2. Students will increasingly learn through engaging in discussion being able to explain and justify their reasoning and conclusions, based on specific evidence. 6 1. All teachers, including our ESL and SETTS teachers will promote learning through discussion All students, Teacher Teams Sept.'18- June'19 2. They will allow students to learn through engaging in discussion by attempting to explain and justify their reasoning and conclusions, based on specific evidence. 3. Teachers skilled in the use of questioning and discussion techniques challenge students to examine their premises, to build a logical argument, and to critique the arguments of others. Instructional Leaders, ESL, SETTS Teachers, Teacher Teams. 4. We want to eliminate the confusion of discussion with explanation of content; as important as that is, it’s not discussion. Our teachers will be encouraged to pose a question and invites all students’ views to be heard, enabling students to engage in discussion directly with one another, not always mediated by the teacher. They will build further questions on student responses and insist that students examine their premises, build a logical argument, and critique the arguments of others. 5. Teachers will use techniques to encourage all students to contribute to the discussion and enlists the assistance of students to ensure this outcome, including our ELL and Spec Ed. Students who may require time to assemble their thinking and time to get across their ideas to the group or class. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents and families will receive information of the Teacher Rounds process. Administration will ensure parents: - Receive a monthly newsletter outlining units of study for each grade and the expected learning outcomes; - Be invited for discussion during the scheduled ‘Parent Engagement Periods’; - Be invited to ‘Coffee and Conversation’ held in the ‘Parent’s Room’ to discuss aspects of the program as it impacts on student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. LPP SAM will provide for release of staff *Oct-May 10:00-2:00) for inter-visitations and teacher meetings for LP teachers 7  Instructional resources to support teacher learning toward achievement of this goal Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A SIG PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In class Observation of teacher’s facilitation of student discussions especially measured by indicators in the Danielson 3b rubric Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February Advance Report for Goal 4: Quality of student discussion as observed during classroom observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. We are on track to meet this goal. Based on grade team agendas, we have seen an increase in teacher’s developing resources to support student discussion (such as sentence stems, discussion prompts, discussion rubrics) This has subsequently led to an increase in student discussion as evidenced by the Advance Data. We have seen a decrease in the percentage teachers rated as developing in Danielson’s 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques) from 15.84% in 2018 to 9.47% in 2019. There has been an increase in the effective category of this component from 74.26% in 2018 to 81.05% in 2019. Additionally, we have seen a slight increase in the highly effective category from 9.47 in 2018 to 9.90% in 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017, the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math 4%. Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  28% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 9%  43% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 1%  50% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 7%  54% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  51% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 53% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 49%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 4%  15% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 6%  44% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 3%  56% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  21% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 14%  49% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 7%  57% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 2% School Quality Guide 2017-18 Average of Responses: Effective: 1.2 Highly Effective: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 2.2, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 5.1 9  2017-18 School Survey Response Rates Parents 89% (444) Teachers 98% (44) Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP Rating and Score 2017-18), Score 97/100, therefore Highly Effective Strengths: 2017‐2018 school status was determined by 2018 NYSED tests. 2017‐2018 School Standing: Good Standing We are very proud of the achievement of PS204 within the Framework for Great Schools, especially the elements of ‘Rigorous Instruction’ and ‘Effective School Leadership’ where we have demonstrated Proficiency levels when compared with Average Citywide achievements. In 2017-18 parent workshops are scheduled monthly and the rate of parent attendance is generally low among upper grades Varied attendance at school sponsored workshops on school programs and curricula; Spanish translation is always available, though a sector of the Spanish speaking community have limited literacy skills in Spanish and this places additional strains on the time and availability of the Parent Coordinator to meet the volume of need requested; New immigrant families demonstrate and or express a reluctance to make full use of what the school offers in terms of resources and opportunities; We have instituted a regular period for each teacher on Tuesdays for appointments to be made with and or by parents to discuss their child’s progress or any issues arising, and we want to track the attendance data held by individual teachers to ascertain the level of participation; Principal welcomes all parents for coffee and a conversation during parent engagement time after school on Tuesday; Challenges: To continue to build students’ ability to engage in authentic discussions, we need to create opportunities for discussion around content area topics. This requires us to deepen students’ ability to use tools to self and peer assess. Additionally, we will need to use similar structures to support student’s ability to self-regulate their social behaviors when engaging in conversations with one another. To continue to extend our performance in meeting our goals in terms of ‘Academic Rigor’ and ‘Teacher Collaboration’ we can develop a cohesive grade level academic language base. In reference to these elements of the Framework for Great Schools our goals are designed to continue to support higher achievement for all students and particularly our student sub-groups. To focus on deepening rigor in literary and mathematics and developing a deeper understanding of the language demands in all subject areas. Our professional development, collaborative planning and rigorous instruction will work 0  to ensure every student makes progress. In this way we will have a continued emphasis on improving planning and instruction to provide the best possible support for improved outcomes for our subgroups. To continue an emphasis on a school-wide comprehensive and cohesive approach to discipline that has a variety of appropriate consequences for students – in terms of the elements of Framework for Great schools this goal represents ‘Supportive School Environment’. To continue a focus on improving family and community outreach - the specific element within the Framework for Great Schools is ‘Strong Family Ties’ and ‘Supportive Environment.’ Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 5: By June 2019 as a result of our efforts we will forge improved partnership with parents and family to assure that all students pre-K- to Grade 5 have the support and resources they need to succeed in school and in life, specifically through a schedule of workshops involving parents and children working together. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator Instructional Leaders, Teachers 1. In the past our monthly parent workshops the rate of parent attendance has generally been low among upper grades and we plan to change this situation by: All Parents and families Sept.'18- June'19 - promoting school sponsored workshops on school programs and curricula - always providing Spanish translation - conducting outreach to new immigrant families who demonstrate a reluctance to make full use of what the school offers in terms of resources and opportunities through promotion - Tuesdays parents are encouraged to attend their child’s classroom to discuss progress or any issues arising, and we want to track the attendance data held by individual teachers to ascertain the level of participation 2. We will conduct student-led discussions during Parent Engagement when students will present a report on their work/performance and they will be encouraged to state what their next steps for improvement will be. 3. Principal welcomes all parents for coffee and a conversation during parent engagement time after school on Tuesday We aim to develop opportunities to build on outreach to local community groups and city agencies to support enrichment programs in the Arts and after school activities, such as the following: All Parents Sept.'18- June'19 Instructional Leaders, Parents Coordinator, CBO's -Basketball team and Cheerleaders Grades 3-5 -Project BOOST – Grades 4-5 2  -DFOY-Community-Based Organization (CBO) a no-cost afterschool and summer program for 150 students - Math Academy on weekly basis for Grades 3-5 students Math Parent Workshops on monthly basis - ESL Parent Classes - Title III Saturday Academy for NYSESLAT support K-2 students, AISK-5 - Cool Culture where families explore world cultures through Museum visits etc - Cook Shop providing healthy cooking habits for parents - Dancing Classrooms- ballroom dancing for grades 4 - Dance program for students in grades 1 and 2 - Millennium Dance – afterschool. Our Parent Coordinator conducts: - Summer orientation luncheon for parents to meet the teachers in September - Regular meetings on topics of concern to parents around curricula and common core standards and issues of health and safety that are widely advertised and with translation available, as required. All Parents and families Sept.'18- June'19 Parent Coordinator We are promoting partnership having parent(s) who will work with their child(ren) in a program involving: All Parents, families and their children Sept.'18- June'19 Parent Coordinator - cooking - math games - art programs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Districtwide events will be widely promoted to provide opportunities for families to engage in learning strategies which can support the social emotional development of habits of mind leading to college and career readiness. 3  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Funding allocated for Parent Coordinator and activities, including workshops; - Monthly calendar of events & monthly Principal letter is sent home; - Parent Conferences and school events advertised with flyers sent home and monthly calendar; - Scheduling and information home in regard to in school and out of school activities through community organizations and city agencies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. - Minutes of SLT Meetings - Evidence of Parent Coordinator translated communiques to home into Spanish - Minutes of monthly PTA meetings with presentations on aspects of the curricular - Sign in sheets for Open House providing specific information, showcasing student work and achievements, and answering questions to help parents provide support at home - Our Progress Report - Sign in sheets for Parent/Teacher Conferences - School Survey Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February Benchmark Report for Goal 5: Record attendance at PTA meetings and parent workshop. We continue to deepen our partnership with the Child Mind Institute who provides our parents with meaningful workshops on Promoting Positive Behavior At Home. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. We are on track to meet this goal. We have seen an increase in attendance at parent workshops by at least 10% (dependent on the type of workshop). There has been an increase in the number of parents meetings with teachers during parent-engagement time. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Fundations K-3 Small group During school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) UsingiReady and T.C. Running Records, inclass assessments for referral. The RTI committee recommends Tier I, II, or III intervention Wilson for reading comprehension Guided Reading intervention for 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade students around identified needed skills and strategies Small group After School by two times a week Saturday School Grade 1-2 students NYSESLATcriteria Level 1 - 2 students in theNYSELA The Title III Enhance Language Proficiency Imagine Learningengages four modalities to enhance language acquisition. The Title 1 Academy services instruction Small group instruction utilizing 5  Grades 2-5 based on TC Running Records Reading Recovery strategies Small group Small group guided reading Kindergarten and 1st grade students struggling readers based on TC Running Records Small Group Small Group During the School Day During the School Day During the school day. Mathematics UsingiReadyand class level assessmentsThe RTI committee recommends Tier I, II, and III intervention services. Level 1 students in theNYS Math Test identified and targeted for intervention services. Small group instruction Small group After School 6 Small group instruction Small group After School  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Using classroom level assessment analysis, studentsidentified for intervention services n/a The Title I after school program services students at risk for not meeting the performance standards in science n/a Small group hands on exploration and support After School n/a n/a Through the recommendations of teachers, paraprofessionals, parents, ACS workers, students are identified for intervention services. The Guidance Counselor services Small group During the school day mandated and at-risk students. The school social worker takes care of mandated and at-risk services two days a week. The SETSS provider meets with at risk students on a weekly basis. There is a nurse who addresses health concerns daily. The Occupational and Physical Therapists observe tomake recommendations around sensory needs as well as fine and gross motor skills for at risk students. Small group Small group One to One One to One 7  8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 82 Students in Temporary Housing, including Doubled up, In the Shelter, Other Temporary Living Situations 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies, such as uniforms, exercise books, pens and pencils etc Education supplies, such as fiction or non-fiction texts and novels Services such as family and individual counseling and access to support services Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9 School supplies, such as uniforms, exercise books, pens and pencils etc Education supplies, such as fiction or non-fiction texts and novels Services such as family and individual counseling and access to support services 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. As of September 2015, 100% of our teachers are certified and 90% hold masters degrees. To ensure that there 1. continues to be high quality instruction, we will implement the following:  Coordinate professional development activities for the application of higher order thinking skills in the classroom  Provide workshops for developing practices on Common Core standard-setting instruction in specific content areas Implement small, focused study groups for teachers to share and reflect on practices   Develop action research projects in which teachers formulate questions, examine school-based data, and address areas of instruction  Provide lab sites in ELA and math to improve instructional practices  Provide professional development on Danielson’s Framework for teaching  Participate in city and state conferences. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Plan weekly curriculum team meetings where administrators, consultants, teachers and paraprofessionals can collaborate on planning and revising units of study  Develop a professional development calendar that aligns with strategies outlined in curriculum calendars  Provide professional development in Common Core Learning Standards and unit planning  Provide professional development in Webb’s Depth of Knowledge  Provide professional development in Danielson’s Framework for teaching  Provide professional development to deepen understanding of effective data driven instructional practices   Create a School Development Committee to create and implement Professional Learning Community Cycles Implement study groups around professional literature and resources on EngageNY 1   Teachers will participate in the learning based on learning needs in collaboration with a supervisor Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.).  Kindergarten open houses   Parent/child orientation where they go over expectations for the year, school routines, curriculum and Scheduled tours of the school experience a modified day in kindergarten with their parents  Parent coordinator meets with parents and provides a take home kit to support students at home Information packet and family handbook ( with translated versions available) 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  Instructional leaders participate in weekly team meeting where teachers facilitate the meeting and plan the agenda  Curriculum decisions are discussed during team meetings with teachers  A MOSL committee meets to make decisions about local measures used school wide 2   Partnership with Learner Center Initiative (LCI) to develop assessments, rubrics, and checklists for CCLS tasks Professional Learning Community provides professional development on the use of formative and summative assessments PD provided on analyzing student work, the NYS ELA and Math Exams, iReady, DRA2 and classroom level assessments to guide instruction 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A-E Section5A-E Section5A-E NA Section 5A-E Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 566,935 52,076.66 12,366 0 3,702,879 X X X NA X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 3  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X204, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. PS204 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X204, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 7  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 8  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 0  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 4 2 2 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P.S. 204X is an elementary school located in the Morris Heights section of the Bronx. This pre-kindergarten through fifth grade school has a population of 621. According to the latest ethnic data, 68% of students are Hispanic, 28% are Black, 1% is Native American, 1% is Asian, 1% is White and 1% is Multi-Racial. Within this population about 12% of our students are ELLs. There are seventy two ELL students in grades kindergarten through five. Upon examination of the needs of our students through the 2016 NYSESLAT and the ELL Data Analysis (EDAT), it is clear that our kindergarten, first and second grade ELLs need more support in all four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Our third, fourth and fifth grade ELLs need more support in reading comprehension and writing. The goal of the Title III program is to provide supplementary instructional support to enhance language proficiency for all of our ELL students. During our Saturday Academy program, kindergarten, first and second grade students will receive one-to-one instruction through engaging activities specifically designed to meet their individual language acquisition needs in all four modalities. In addition to one-to-one instruction, students will utilize Imagine Learning which is a computerized, research-based program. The various strategies the students will learn through the Imagine Learning program will give them optimum opportunity to progress and make gains in English literacy. During the after-school Literacy Enrichment Program, second, third, fourth and fifth grade students will receive one-to-one instruction, utilizing reading comprehension strategies and build upon their writing skills. The student's will work in groups based on their TC reading levels. The students will be working in various learning centers based on their needs while the teacher works with one small group at a time. In addition, there will be a Newcomer Enrichment Program for first and second year ELLs in grades one to five. This program is meant to supplement the language development of our new students during after-school hours. Students will work in groups based on their proficiency level and will move to different groups based on their English development. At the end of each class, students will utilize ESL Brain Pop as a whole group. This program develops listening, reading and speaking, while teaching grammar and vocabulary in fun and entertaining segments, All three of these Thursday after school programs will begin on October 11, 2018 and end on May 2, 2019. There will be approximately 26 days scheduled. There are a variety of reports that teachers can utilize to document student progress and plan next steps for the students in their language development. Articulation forms will be maintained by each teacher and shared with the classroom teachers to ensure instructional continuity. 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The Saturday Academy program will begin in January. There will be ten sessions on Saturdays from 9:00am-12:00pm. This program will terminate in April. The Literacy Enrichment program will begin in October and will continue to May 2019. This program will be on Thursdays from 2:20pm-4:00pm. These programs will be implemented by one certified ESL teacher, one certified bilingual teachers and two content teachers. The Newcomer Enrichment Program will begin in October and will continue to June. The program will be on Thursdays from 2:20pm-4:00pm. This program will be implemented by one certified ESL teacher and will allow any new students to enter the program throughout the school year. The language of instruction will be English. The teachers will receive professional development and time for planning prior to the implementation of this program. Program notification forms will be sent to parent's in their preferred language and in English. The attendance and permission slips will be kept in a file cabinet in the main office. Teachers working these programs will have access to the permission slips and attendance for their class. Weekly attendance will be taken by the teacher and more than one absence in the program will be addressed by the teacher, parent coordinator or administration. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: P.S. 204 believes that effective learning opportunities are the key to increasing student performance. Professional development will be provided by Teacher's College in reading and writing and aligning curriculum to the Common Core Standards throughout the year. In addition, staff will participate in network sponsored NYSESLAT Assessment professional development. Attendance at these workshops will take place from September-June at no cost to the program. Also, the ENL provider will attend professional development workshops sponsored by the Department of Education and the NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network at Fordham University. The ENL teacher will then turn key valuable tools, strategies and information to the rest of the staff during Monday Professional Development. Teachers working in the Title III program will receive ongoing professional development during Monday professional development time as well as designated after school planning sessions by the ENL coordinator, Elizabeth Miskimmon. After school planning session will begin on Thursday, October 4th for a duration of 2 hours. Topics covered during the professional development session include learning centers appropriate for English Language Learners, listening activities, and reading and writing strategies. The students involved in the Title III after school will be positively impacted through the implementation of the above mentioned activities. The ENL coordinator will provide the agenda for the professional developments and attendance records will be kept through the use of a sign in sheet and maintained in the main office. 4  Part C: Professional Development Beginning in October, P.S. 204 will be utilizing professional learning communities (PLCs) during Monday Professional Development, where we will be dedicating learning cycles for strategies to use with English Language Learners. The PLCs will be four-week cycles where teachers can choose which learning community best fits their needs. All staff members that service English Language Learners will have the opportunity to attend the PLCs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents at PS 204x are provided with ample opportunities to interact with teachers and school personnel. Communication with parents occurs using multiple media; written notices, School Messenger, on the school message scroll, as well as through telephone communication. Our school is committed to meeting with parents on Tuesdays from 2:20 pm to 3:00 pm during Parent Engagement at the no cost to Title III. Also, throughout the year we will be having Parent Teacher Association meetings so that parents have an open forum to voice their concerns and needs. During the first Parent Teacher Association meeting, the Parent Coordinator and the President of the the Parent Teacher Association will distribute a survey regarding the needs of the parents. On the survey, parents will be asked if they are interested in Adult ENL classes, computer classes, Parent Book Club and which workshops will benefit them. From this survey P.S. 204 will implement classes and workshops during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time at no cost to Title III. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff N/A and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 9 School Name Public School 204 Borough Bronx School Number 204 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Amanda Blatter Coach Ellen Hill ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Elizabeth Miskimmon/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Erica Sass/ENL/Science Teacher/Subject Area Doreen Gonzalez/Bilingual Related-Service Provider Maria Garcia Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Assistant Principal Rachel Hunger Coach Micky Peguero School Counselor Dale Drakeford Parent Katia Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Lily Nissing Field Support Center Staff Member Kristy De La Cruz Other (Name and Title) Patricia Sousa, AP C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 2 3 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 7  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 625 Total number of ELLs 64 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.24% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2017-18 2017-18 2017-18 2017-18 2017-18 2017-18 Lang. NA NA NA NA NA NS Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The Teacher's College running record is administered to all ELL students in grades K-5 three times a year. An individual TC reading level is assigned to each student for independent and guided reading. I-Ready is an assessment tool used throughout the school that includes instructional planning for English language learners. Both of these tools provide both quantitative data (level of performance) as well as qualitative data, including areas of strengths as well as areas of need across domains. After the assessments are administered the ELL priver and classroom teacher analyze the results to plan small group instruction used during push in services, pull out services, and classroom instruction. English Language Learners and struggling readers use Imagine Learning at least three times a week. Each student is given a beginning assessment, mid and interim assessment. The data shows that within the first three years that an ELL is in school they are acquiring Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS). They are progressing through the TC levels but are not meeting grade level standards in grades 3-8 5. However, after three years students begin to acquire the academic language that allows them to participate in grade appropriate reading and writing tasks. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The data from the TC running record, iReady and Imagine Learning is then inputted into a School Assessment Management System (SAMS) sheet that is open to all teacher's to view. Based upon students assessment results, differentiated goals are developed for each student and revisited at least twice throughout the school year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Writing summative assessments are given periodically to ELL students. Students are given the NYC Performance Tasks for ELA and Math and the ELL Periodic Assessment twice a year. The ENL teacher will then use the ELL Periodic Assessment to identify student's individual needs and forms groups based on those needs. For newcomer students that speak Spanish, they are administered the Spanish LAB and this is used to give a baseline of their home language. If a student is literate in Spanish then we will use their first language to further develop their English reading and writing. If they are not literate in Spanish, then we will focus on English foundational skills in reading and writing. Based on these assessments as well as analysis for the NYSESLAT examination writing continues to be an area of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students are given feedback from their writing and next steps. Then, students use the next steps to develop a writing goal to work on for the next 4-6 weeks. Also, students are given their independent TC reading level and develop a goal to move up one or two reading levels within a given time frame. The ENL teacher works with small groups to address interventions based on the Periodic Assessment. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] RTI instruction for ELLs is a collaborative effort between service providers and general education teachers to develop strategies for ELLs using the data from the universal screener and other assessments. All students including ELLs are given the universal screener (i-Ready) three times a year along with tailored instruction. There are weekly grade meetings and RTI meetings to monitor progress and discuss further interventions if needed. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The current NYSESLAT and prior NYSESLAT or the NYSITELL are used to evaluate student growth and progress. Also, the ELA and Math state exam scores are used by the ENL teacher to better inform the ENL program for the next year. The ENL teacher compiles all of this data at the beginning of the year and conducts professional development to the whole school. During the PD teachers are able to analyze the data for the ELLs in their class. The 2016 NYSESLAT data showed that we had a high proportion of expanding level students. The 2017 NYSESLAT had 20% of our students reach Commanding. Our greatest area of need continues to be writing for all grade bands. Also, the data shows that 5th grade students struggle with the listening component of the NYSESLAT. The ENL teacher is incorporating more listening activities that coincide with reading and writing. These listening excerpts become longer as the year progresses to build students listening stamina. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The data from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT, ELA and Math state exams are then inputted into a SAMS excel sheet that is open to all teacher's to view. This data is used to rearrange and formulate student groupings for the following year. NYSESLAT results for each student, individual modality scores and an explanation for each proficiency level is given to all teachers in the beginning of the school year, accompanied by professional development on meeting the needs of our students based on our data. Also, the ENL teacher is training to develop and use the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT) to support planning, instruction and programming. 9  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Entering and Emerging students receive a combination of stand-alone ENL and integrated ENL. The ENL teacher provides stand-alone services to entering and emerging students. These students are grouped based on proficiency level and age. Students receive one unit (180 minutes) of study in ENL stand-alone. Also, these students receive one unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL. Transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL/Content area. The content area is provided by one of our science teachers who is dually certified in ESL. Also, the transitioning students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL by a certified ENL teacher. Expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL. In addition, Commanding students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL. During integrated ENL, students are grouped heterogeneous and homogeneous based on the students' needs and the task for that day. Based on the task, students could work independently, conference with the ENL teacher, work with a partner, or work in a small group with the ENL teacher. There are two ELL classes per grade plus some ELLs in our 12:1:1 bridge classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the beginning of each new school year the ENL teacher, science teacher that is a certified ENL teacher and the administration sit down to formulate schedules that best meet the needs of our ELL population. The minutes required by CR Part 154.2 are analyzed and as a group we come up with the best schedules to optimize time and efficiency. There are 2 classes in each grade that are designated for the ENL students. This allows the ENL teacher and the science content teacher to provide the maximum number of the integrated services per grade. The ENL Freestanding program provides services to small groups of ENL students that are Entering and Emerging. The freestanding ENL program teaches students thematic units of study in ELA. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels receive 360 minutes per week of ENL services and students at the Transitioning and Expanding level receive 180 minutes per week of ENL services. In addition, students that are at the Commanding level receive 90 minutes of ENL services for two years after reaching Commanding. When new students enter the school there is a smooth transition into their appropriate group and class. We have found the monthly ENL Data reports to be useful in ensuring our programming in STARS is up to date and students are placed in the appropriate class. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL Freestanding program provides instruction in English with native language support emphasizing English language acquisition. This program provides services to small groups of ENL students that are Entering and Emerging. Students at the Entering and Emerging levels receive 360 minutes per week of ENL services and students at the Transitioning and Expanding level receive 180 minutes per week of ENL services. In addition, students that are at the Commanding level receive 90 minutes of ENL services for two years after reaching Commanding. ELL students receive explicit instruction by licensed ENL teachers. The following instructional strategies are used by the ENL teacher to facilitate language acquisition: Total Physical Response, 0  Peer Tutoring, Flexible Grouping, Cooperative Learning, Language Experience Approach, Visuals, Front-loading, taping into Prior Knowledge, Experiments, Observations, use of Graphic Organizers and Role Playing. Additionally, ELL students who are identified as far below grade level in reading and math are eligible to receive Response to Intervention (RTI) services and targeted instruction from the AIS teacher during the day. During the integrated ENL services small group instruction is differentiated according to students’ demonstrated needs and their proficiency levels. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Every student whose Native Language is Spanish , is administered the Spanish LAB. The Spanish LAB gives us a good measurement of a students knowledge and education in their first language. Imagine Learning has Native Language support throughout the program. In addition, Imagine Learning periodically produces parent reports in the parents Native Language that the ENL teacher will send home so that the parent is informed of their child's progress. The Imagine Learning program constantly assesses the students strengths and weaknesses. As a student develops more English, then less of their Native Language is used in the program. However, there is always some support in the students Native Language. When needed, students will be assessed in Spanish using Pruebas de Aprovechamiento Revisada by Woodcock-Johnson and Cuaderno de Practica by Trofeos may be used to further assess literacy in the students native language. Theses assessments are administered by a certified bilingual teacher. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE's receive stand-alone and integrated services depending on their English proficiency level, use Imagine Learning and I-Ready as a supplemental tool 3-5 times a week and receive AIS services 3-5 times a week. SIFE students are given Native Language Arts (Spanish) support as needed and counseling services and/or support as needed b. Newcomers receive a total of 360 hours a week of ENL services using both a stand-alone model and integrated services. During the stand-alone period newcomers develop speaking and build vocabulary in a smaller environment that gives them the confidence and desire to learn a new language. In their grade class they are partnered with someone with a little higher level of English. Newcomers are encouraged to go on Imagine Learning everyday for 20-30 minutes. The program builds their new language learning by using their primary language as support. Finally, all newcomers are given targeted instruction and support based on their goals. In addition, we provide Enrichment Thursday for Newcomer and second year students for two hours a week. Students are grouped based on proficiency level and need. Students have additional opportunities to build upon their knowledge of English. c. Instruction is targeted based on data and assessments, such as, TC running records, i-Ready, Periodic Assessment, Imagine Learning, etc. ELLs receive the mandated hours of service based on their proficiency level in an integrated ENL environment and by the ENL certified science teacher. If needed, intervention services are given by AIS. There is differentiated instruction on a daily basis in the integrated co-teaching class. d. In addition to the services mentioned in number 6, section c. Long-term ELLs are referred to RTI for tier 2 instruction and in some cases, tier 1 instruction. If the student has an IEP we take this into consideration and compare their IEP with the modalities that the student needs help in to see if there is any correlation. Once this is done, we develop an instructional plan based on all of the information and data. Also, there is regular review of interim assessments to track progress in targeted instructional areas through differentiated instruction based on need (i.e., running records, Periodic Assessments). a-d. For all subgroups, the ENL teacher will do more front-loading of vocabulary and tap into students prior knowledge with visuals, videos, Powerpoints, explicit vocabulary instruction along with sentence starters, paragraph frames, TPR and manipulatives. All ENL students can participate in Title III after school and Saturday Academy for further instructional support. e. Former ELLs continue to receive at least 90 minutes of ENL services whether provided by the ENL teacher or the certified ENL teacher through science. Additionally, students continue to use Imagine Learning and are recommended to use the 1  program 2-3 times a week. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? There are numerous instructional strategies and grade-level materials for teachers of ELL-SWDs including: •Daily individualized instruction by certified ENL teachers, SETSS and related service providers. •Regular review of interim assessments to track progress in targeted instructional areas through differentiated instruction based on need (i.e., running records, Periodic Assessments, i-Ready, Imagine Learning). •Portfolio reviews to ensure grade-level performance and meeting benchmarks •Native language support •Periodic Assessment for ELLs •Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to support literacy and content-area learning •Individualized Education Program (IEP) for eligible students. Teachers also use Imagine Learning, i-Ready, MyOn and TC running records to help monitor and assess students' strengths and needs. SWDs are grouped based on their level of English and are expected to do the same work as the other students with differentiation when needed. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students are given services based on the Least Restrictive Environment (LRE). Whenever possible, students remain in the General Education class and receive part-time services such as SETSS (Special Teacher Support Services), Speech, and Counseling. If additional interventions are needed, students are placed in a ICT class. As a last resort and after all strategies and interventions have been tried only then will a student be placed in a self-contained classroom (12:1:1). For all program placements, students must receive mandated ENL services in accordance with their IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. RTI instruction for ELLs is a collaborative effort between service providers and general education teachers to develop strategies for ELLs using the data from the universal screener and other assessments. Our RTI committee meets twice a week to discuss students brought for RTI. Our science teachers have after school enrichment in the spring for students that need additional help with science terminology, hands on labs and other scientific endeavors. The following are the targeted intervention programs that are being used by the school including the Academic Intervention Specialist (AIS), English as a New Language teacher and SETSS teachers: •Imagine Learning, Grades K-5 (In English and the child's primary language) •Fundations, Grades K-3 •Teacher's College reading and writing program K-5 •NYS Coach ELA, Grades 3-5 •ELAP, Grades 3-5 •ELL Component of Go Math K-5 •Engage NY Math K-5 •NYS Coach Math, Grades 3-5 •I-Ready grades K-5 2  •Ready NY grades 3-5 •MyOn •Leveled Literacy Intervention •Wilson 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school as a whole is embracing co-teaching and implementing co-teaching strategies to meet the diverse needs of students. Grade teams will be meeting during the summer and throughout the school year based on the needs of our ELL and SWD students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Four years ago we discontinued the bilingual program because we did not have enough parents that chose the bilingual program for their child. We had a kindergarten bilingual class and a first grade and second grade bridge bilingual class. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs can participate in Saturday Academy and Title III supplemental instruction on Thursday Enrichment. Students are grouped based on their grade level for Saturday Academy. This program gives students extra preparation for the NYSESLAT. The purpose of the Title III Thursday Enrichment is to enrich the students English acquisition. Students are grouped based on their reading and writing levels and their needs. Students develop their reading, writing, listening and speaking with students at their similar level. Also, all of the students participate in BrainPop ESL which builds on their listening and develops vocabulary. In addition, all ELLs are open to participate in all programs both during and after school (i.e., academic intervention afterschool, basketball, performance theatre, Flamenco dancing, martial arts, ballroom dancing, etc.). Many ELLs are immigrants that are invited to participate in the Title III Immigrant programs which have included, Taiko Drumming and Architecture of a Neighborhood. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Imagine learning, i-Ready, MyOn, BrainPop ESL, voicestreams, bilingual glossaries, thesaurus, content picture dictionaries, Fundations, sentence starters, sentence and paragraph frames, realia, pictures, videos, and graphic organizers are all used to support ELLs. Also, students can borrow bilingual fiction and non-fiction books from the library. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program, there is always support given to a student in their primary language. Imagine Learning supports students in their primary language and gives homework with directions in their primary language. Also, students have access to books in the library that are solely in their native language or bilingual books to further develop their primary language and English. Students can borrow bilingual fiction and non-fiction books from school. This year we purchased bilingual books in Arabic and Chinese since these two subgroups of English language learners are growing in our school. Many times, a student who is developing their English will be partnered with someone who has an expanding or commanding knowledge of English and also speaks the students primary language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher, content area teachers, clusters and special service providers scaffold reading, writing and questioning in order to meet the needs of our ELLs while helping them achieve the CCLS. All staff collaborate to ensure that content area objectives are met by ELLs and best practices are shared among all teachers. Grade teams meet to plan and periodically there is time allotted for cross planning between grades, the ENL teacher and special service providers. Finally, the ENL teacher works with the classroom teachers to ensure that the balanced literacy model provides a bridge to English language acquisition. In K-3 classrooms Teacher's College Reading and Writing program is followed. In grades 4 and 5 teacher created CCLS aligned units are used to teach ENL. Both of these curriculum include modifications for English Language Learners. 3  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Not applicable 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the beginning of the school year, students and parents are invited to a school orientation. They are presented with the opportunity to meet and greet teachers and school personnel. Activities are conducted to familiarize students and parents with their surroundings and to create a comfort zone for them Also, newly enrolled ELL students are placed in a Newcomers class along with other new ELLs. The age group of the students range from 1st to 5th grade. This class focuses on early emergent speaking, vocabulary development and BICS. When we receive funding from Title III Immigrant, we offer artistic classes from an outside organization, classes have included Taiko drumming and Architecture of a Neighborhood to ELLs that are immigrants and non-ELL immigrants. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At the moment, we do not offer language electives to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? P.S. 204x believes that effective learning opportunities are the key to increasing student performance and have created several learning models that support professional growth. Professional development in ENL techniques and methodologies provide support for teachers and staff, including secretaries, related service providers and the parent coordinator while they master new strategies and improve their skills. The principal, assistant principal, ENL teacher, and consultants provide professional development activities during common planning and Chancellor’s Professional Development days. P.S. 204 has developed Professional Learning Cycles for all teachers and paraprofessionals during our Monday Professional Development time. These learning cycles allow all teachers including ENL teachers to share their best practices with their colleagues. In addition during this time teachers are able to share in vertical teams modifications they have made to curriculum to meet the needs of English Language Learners. The instructional approaches presented are modeled by presenters and can be applied immediately in a variety of program models. Additionally, ENL staff share their understandings during common planning sessions. These sessions target how to utilize research-based strategies such as: language functions and structures within the context of an ENL content based lesson, how teachers can scaffold academic language to support students’ participation and how to align language instruction to ENL and Common Core Learning standards. In addition, through Teacher Rounds our teacher have been able to observe best practices across grades. Inter- classroom visitations increased on all grade levels. We will continue to expand Teacher Rounds to all grades and related service providers during the 2017-18 school year. 4  Our ENL provider meets with non-pedagogical staff to provide professional development around support for families of English Language Learners , especially the registration process for new families and communication with the school community. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P.S. 204 has developed Professional Learning Cycles during Monday Professional Development time. Two of these cycles will focus on ELL specific research-based strategies and best practices. Various instructional approaches are presented and discussed among teachers. These two cycles meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2. In addition, the ENL teacher conducts professional development in the beginning of the school year to discuss, evaluate and explain the NYSESLAT data and individual student proficiency levels. Our ENL teachers and Bilingual education teachers also participate in outside Professional Development. The ENL and Bilingual teachers participate in Professional Development presented by NYS/NYC Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network at Fordham University. This year the ENL and Bilingual teachers will participate in professional development presented by the Bronx Borough Instructional Leads. These professional development workshops focus on ELL specific needs, strategies and best practices. Between our Professional Development time on Mondays and outside professional development organized by various education centers, the 50% of total hours for bilingual and ENL educators will be met. All teachers are responsible for keeping records of their professional development. Also, the school office is able to keep a copy of professional development certificates in a teachers' file if they wish. Teachers are also required to input their professional development time after five years of having a professional license. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher has time during Tuesday Parent Engagement to meet with parents and/or guardians of ELLs. The ENL teacher is required to meet with parents at least twice a year. During these meetings that ENL teacher discusses with the parent and/or guardian the goals of the program, language development progress of their child, language proficiency assessment results and the overall language development needs of their child. The ENL teacher keeps a sign in sheet and notes regarding all individual meetings and/or phone calls with ELL parents and/or guardians. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents at PS 204x are provided with ample opportunities to interact with teachers and school personnel. A variety of workshops and orientations ensure that parents gain knowledge and become active participants in their children’s education. Parents are invited to meet the teachers, attend orientation meetings and visit with the administration. Throughout the year, parents are invited to writing and reading celebrations, family nights, monthly award assemblies, book fairs, classroom trips, and workshops. The ENL teacher has Parent English classes twice a month for all parents. English books and bilingual dictionaries are provided to parents to keep. 5  Each month, parents are invited to attend Parent Association meetings where they receive updates on school issues. Through their participation in these activities, parents develop personal skills as well as attain a better understanding of their child’s academic life. A school calendar and a monthly newsletter ensure that parents are always informed about school activities and programs. Monthly newsletters are written in English and Spanish to ensure that most parents know what their child is learning in school and gives recommendations to the parents so they can further help and be involved in their child's education. During Tuesday Parent Engagement time, the principal hosts "Coffee and Conversation with the Principal." During this time, parents are invited to have coffee and cookies with the principal. This is an open forum where parents can discuss their child's progress with the principal. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Amanda Blatter, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P.S. 204 School DBN: 9x204 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Amanda Blatter Title Principal Rachel Hunger Assistant Principal Lily Nissing Parent Coordinator Elizabeth Miskimmon ENL/Bilingual Teacher Katia Rodriguez Parent Erica Sass Ellen Hill Micky Peguero Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Dale Drakeford School Counselor Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Kristy De la Cruz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Director for ELLs Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 6/28/17 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09x204 School Name: P.S. 204 Superintendent: Rodriguez-Rosar The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lilly Nissing Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. P.S. 204X reaches out to the 267 parents/guardians whose home language is not English in order to communicate information about the school’s academic program, student achievement and parent learning opportunities. During registration parents and staff use the language cards provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit to determine a parent and/or guardians preferred language if it is not English or Spanish. Then, the parent and/or guardian fills out all of the appropriate paperwork for the registration including the HLIS, student emergency card and the parent and/or guardians' preferred language. Teachers are notified of individual student's home language so that oral and written translations can be provided as needed. Based on new student enrollment these numbers could change. 9  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 2 1 259 1 433 Arabic Bengali Chinese Any Spanish Hausa English As of 9/12/18 .29 .29 .14 37.11 .14 62.03 2 2 1 261 1 431 .29 .29 .14 37.39 .14 61.75 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Non-Applicable as per 9/12/2018 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The parent school handbook annually Translated in school New ELL admit when needed IEP meeting notifications when needed Parent Newsletter and Calendar monthly Chancellor's Back Packed Notices ongoing Translations provided by the Office of DELSS Translated in school Translated in school Chancellor's backpacked notices are already pre-translated into the covered langauges. If needed we go on the DOE website and print out the document in the parent's preferred language. School-wide memos and flyers ongoing Translated in school 0  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide The school has a meet the teacher in the beginning of the school year, two parent-teacher conferences and a family night at the end of the year. four times a year There are various invitations for awards assemblies, writing celebrations and Saturday parent workshops for parents and/or guardians and their child. monthly In addition, teachers meet with the parents' of their students at least twice a year to discuss the students academic progress during Tuesday Parent Engagement time. Also, some teachers use Class Dojo to communicate with parents. weekly Also, each grade team and out of classroom teachers offer a parent workshop during Tuesday parent engagement that assists parents with their child's health and education. monthly interpretation service(s)? During these face to face meetings there are Spanish speaking translators on each floor to provide translation services. If a parent speaks a language other than English and/or Spanish all teachers are given the phone number for the Translation and Interpretation Language Line that is provided by the Department of Education. Invitations to these events are giving to parents in English and Spanish. Also, the parent teacher coordinator sends notifications for events through School Messenger in English and Spanish. If a parent speaks a language other than English and/or Spanish all teachers are given the phone number for the Translation and Interpretation Language Line that is provided by the Department of Education. During these face to face meetings there are Spanish speaking translators available. In addition, parents that speak a language other than English and Spanish will volunteer to translate during these meetings if they are available. Finally, teachers are encouraged to use the Translation and Interpretation Language Line that is provided by the Department of Education. Class Dojo has a built in program that translates texts from English to the parents' native language. During these face to face meetings there are Spanish speaking translators available. In addition, parents that speak a language other than English and Spanish will volunteer to translate during these meetings if they are available. Finally, teachers are encouraged to use the Translation and 1  IEP Meetings ongoing Interpretation Language Line that is provided by the Department of Education. School personnel Teachers will access the over-the-phone interpreter services. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The parent coordinator sends all school messages in both English and Spanish. If a parent speaks another language other than English and/or Spanish they are encouraged to call the school or visit face to face when their is a school wide message. Then, the parent coordinator will use the Translation and Interpretation Language Line to inform the parent of the emergency. Our Plan B in case of a school or city emergency is that the students' teacher will have a mass list of students' name, guardian name, contact number and preferred language. In addition, they will have the over-the-phone interpreter services flyer in their folder to use to contact parent's that speak a language other than English and Spanish. We have encouraged our teachers to save the interpreter services number. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is gone over with the whole school at the beginning of the school year along with the Chancellor's other regulations. Teacher's sign in that they have read the regulations and understand them. In addition, during the last professional development before the first parent-teacher conference the principal, assistant principal and parent coordinator inform and go over with the staff the language access resources available to them during parent-teacher conferences. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of each school year, a Home Language Survey is administered to parents to identify the primary language spoken in the home and their preferred language and mode of communication. Our school, in accordance with Regulation A663, provides translation and interpretation services to our parents who require language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the school community. We display our Multilingual Welcome poster at the security desk along with the language ID guide. This language ID guide is also displayed in the main office. 2  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During Parent Association meetings the Parent Coordinator distributes a parent survey twice a year. One of the questions asks the parents how the school can better meet their needs, including accessibility to information and translation in their preferred language. Each year we strive to improve language services and offer more documents in the parents preferred language. 3 
