2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 12X211 P.S. 211 Principal: TANYA DRUMMOND 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 12x211 CS211 321200010211 Pre-K-8 1919 Prospect Avenue, Bronx, NY 10457 718-901-0436 Phone Number: 718-901-4681 Fax: Tanya Drummond tdrummond@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Tanya Drummond A. Villafane Rosetta Fortune Mr. Pacifico TBD N/A Jorge Blau District Information J. Rosado Superintendent: West Farms jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Tel: (718) 741-8573 Fax: (718) 741-7603 Phone Number: Fax:   Team 6 FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-3963 Phone Number: 718-741-7603 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tanya Drummond A. Villafane Rosetta Fortune Theresa Medina TBD N/A N/A TondalayaAlston Carolyn Sekpah *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Parent Member/ PTATreasurer ParentMember/ PTASecretary   Name ChristineRodriguez SilverioPacifico Christina Dylan Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) SLT Chair PTA Vice President SLT Co-Chair Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview Community School 211 is a bilingual school committed to providing high quality education to all students by meeting their emotional, social, and educational needs. We maintain high academic standards, and fully utilize the resources of our parents, teachers, paraprofessionals and community. Thus, our environment enables future leaders to successfully manage the diverse challenges of this millennium.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Founded in 1969, Community School 211-the Bilingual Magnet School presently resides on 1919 Prospect Avenue between East Tremont and 176th Street. This pre-kindergarten to eighth grade school serves a population of approximately 597 students, as of 06//18, from culturally diverse backgrounds. The school is a central part of the community. The school building is a well-kept, four-story building where pride in the students’ accomplishments is celebrated as evidenced by the prominently displayed student work. CS 211 is one of three schools residing in this building and all facilities are shared. We also have an Early Childhood Program for children ages 2-4 sponsored by the Children’s Aid Society. CS211 implements the Teacher's College Reading and Writing program across Kindergarten through grade eight (8). Our school continues to improve pedagogical practices especially in reading. Teachers use guided reading in small groups to provide targeted instruction. Reading Rescue support is provided in 2nd grade for students not at benchmark reading levels. Additionally, we also have a trained Reading Recovery specialist working with 1st grade students. We follow the Balanced Literacy approach and focus on the writing process through the writing workshop and the use of the writer's notebook. In science, the school partners with Urban Advantage and the Bronx Zoo to increase student’s exposure to STEM instruction and activities. This includes professional development for teachers, administrators and our parent coordinator. The program provides materials for students and trips to expand learning. The school has 3 science cluster teachers that serve grades K-8. Each class receives science laboratory activities as part of the core curriculum. During the month of June students in fourth and eighth grades participate in a science fair. CS 211 has developed several partnerships with the community. Since spring 2010, The Children’s Aid Society (CAS) has provided after school and activities for students and parents. CAS provides parents with classes in technology, GED and English as a New Language (ENL) among many other programs. The Theater of American Ballroom Dancing provides ballroom dancing instruction. City Center offers a modern dance program with the Alvin Ailey Dance Group and the Paul Taylor dancers, and a musical theater partnership facilitated by the Encore Program. There are educational partnerships with Plimoth Plantation in Massachusetts, as well as with the Mount Vernon Hotel in Manhattan. Our students visit the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Morgan Library Museum and the City Museum of New York. CS 211 provides several after school activities. As part of the CAS after school program, targeted middle school students participate in Adolescent Literacy. ELLs have the opportunity to participate with (Learning English for Academic Purpose) LEAP to strengthen their English language development through arts activities (including music, theater and visual arts). We provide Regents classes for eighth grade students in algebra and science. A Gifted & Talented program strengthens academic students' academic skills. Students have the opportunity to prepare for the 0  Specialized High School exam. Finally, CS211 houses one of the few marching bands left in the Bronx. Students receive music instruction and participate throughout the year in various parades and events. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. For the 2018-2019 there is two (1) bilingual (Spanish) class. There are 2 self-contained special education classes. For English as a New Language, we have a push-in/pull-out program for grades 1-8, which serves 125 students who are not in bilingual programs. Our English Language Learners participate in an after school ENL Academy and a Saturday program – English Language Learning through the Arts (ELLA). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School strengths, accomplishments, and challenges C.S. 211 has developed a stable culture for its teachers. Most of our teachers have more than 5 years of experience and longevity here in the community. We continue to improve both teacher and student attendance, which has impacted student growth across this past year. Although this past year we made significant gains, we continue to adapt our English Language Arts (ELA) and Math curricula to meet the needs of all of our students. The School Quality Guide indicates that we are below our peer group average in performance and progress, specifically in ELA. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X211 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 598 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 43 8 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 70 66 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.1% % Reduced Lunch 20.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 85.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.1 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 22.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 11 11 94.1% 0.8% 19.6% 13.9% 0.2% 0.3% 4 11% 9.4 23.7% 52% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Now that our tracking system is in place, established across the school in the various content areas the data reflects the need to clarify what is tracked, the fidelity to the system (consistency) and how the data is used to adjust instruction. The June Instructional Report (JIR) reflects an overall Net change in ELA from 2017 of -4.0%. In Math the JIR reflects only an overall 0.3% increase. As the instructional team further analyzed the data from the 2018 June instructional Report it was evident that our students including all sub groups continue to struggle in both reading, writing and math. Additionally, feedback is not consistently used to push student learning to the edge of their knowledge, did not consistently increase the quality of learning outcomes nor promote students' independence and ownership of their own learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will ensure that all lessons are tracked for student learning against the CCLS through the "tracking" protocol system. Based on data, lessons will be revised and adjusted to cognitively engage all learners including English Language Learners (ELLs) and Students with Disabilities (SWDs), resulting in a 15% decrease of level 1s in both ELA and Math state exams. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Target students based on NYSESLAT scores, IEP goals and NYS scores. Progress monitor students against learning outcomes All Teachers 9/18-6/19 Consultants, Coach, Administration All Teachers 9/18-6/19 Consultants, Coach, Administration to ensure academic growth towards the CCLS. Teachers will understand the key components and concepts of the instructional programs used at CS211 (e.g. Teachers College Reading and Writing, Engage NY math modules, Passport to Learning and Amplify Science) in order to align planning and instruction to the data tracker. Teachers will receive in depth professional development to support a deeper understanding of pedagogical moves that impact learning outcomes for all students students including ELLs and SWDs. Teachers will understand and apply quality teaching for English language learners (QTEL). Teachers will apply scaffolds that enable students to develop competence with academic language through their engagement in rigorous disciplinary activities. In order to streamline the process of looking at student work and to improve student outcomes, teachers will collaborate to gather student data and make adjustments to instruction during common planning times, PLCs and professional development opportunities. Teachers will learn how to give developmentally appropriate feedback that will promote student learning and foster student independence. 4  New teachers, mentors and administration will continue to work with New Teacher Center (NTC), Peer collaborative Teachers in a collaborative process focused on supporting teaching practice. Mentors will work with new teachers weekly to collect and analyze data to inform planning in order to reach all students' needs. The on-line Collaborative Assessment Log (CAL), will be used to document the process/evidence which will be monitored by administration in order to supervise and drive conversations. Lab sites across grades will be established to provide on-going learning opportunities in realistic situations. In order to build the bridge between the home community and the school community, CS211 will continue to expand on the Academic Parent Teacher Team initiative (APPT). The initiative will gather data from the "trackers" to share with parents in order to provide feedback and resources for support at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All Teachers 9/18-6/19 Consultants, Coach, Administration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Sept-June 2018-2019 Open House Parent Teacher Conferences through Academic Parent teacher Teams (APTT) Tuesday parent teacher time Additional workshops based on surveys Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrator time, English As Second Language Consultant 1X per week, Teacher per session for mentoring 1x per week week, Literacy Coach time and professional literature. Additional resources include: Rigby Guided Reading and Teachers College Writing Program for reading and support from literacy coach trained in Reading Recovery, Peer Collaborative teachers and LDC planning platform. 5  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 10% of the targeted students will reach proficiency against the identified high leverage CCLS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) ENGAGE NY Released state test questions via District 12 tracker. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In response to the Framework for Great Schools, after reviewing the 2018 Quality Review Report it remains evident that indicators 3.1 and 4.2 are developing. Although administration has allotted common planning time through out the week and opportunities for learning Mondays and Tuesdays, structured professional collaborations using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning has not been full developed. In math the June Instructional Report revealed that across grades 4-6 and grade 8 there was an overall improvement of 5% (grades 4-6) and 1% (grade 8). In ELA the June Instructional Report revealed a decrease in the area of writing for both 3rd and 6th grades with a -18% respectively. To ensure that our students are receiving both social/emotional and academic support structures need to be developed to improve teacher practice and progress towards goals for groups of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will implement targeted student-centered activities that meet the needs of groups of students both on an academic and social emotional level resulting in a 15% decrease of level 1s in both ELA and math state exams. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school in partnership with the Community Based Organization (CBO), Children's Aid Society will adjust budget allotments to allow for a full time on-site certified social worker to strategically target high risk social emotional students. Students, 9/18-6/19 CBO, Administration Teachers Generation Ready coaches will conduct ongoing professional development around QTEL strategies for English Language Learners (ENLs). lab sites will be developed to highlight best practices that all teachers can learn from. Peer Collaborative teaching positions and a new UFT teacher center will be opened to support teachers across all grades. To develop a more student centered learning environment teachers in grades K-2 will implement strategic student learning centers using classroom data that incorporate rigorous engagement opportunities for al students including ENLs and students with disabilities (SWDs). Students, 9/18-6/19 Administration, consultants, coaches Teachers In grades 3-5 teachers will implement guided reading groups that incorporate student lead conversations around reading habits. 10/18-06/19 In grades 6-8 teachers will implement strategy groups that promote a deeper understanding of thinking about, within and beyond the text. Teachers will receive on-going PD around restorative practices that supports and fosters students using specific social/emotional strategies. Emphasis will be placed on 10/18-06/19 Students, 9/18-6/19 Teachers Consultants, Administration 8 classroom visitations with feedback across the school beginning in September of 2017. Teachers will engage class discussion using ENL strategies in order to facilitate language for all students including ENLs and SWDs. Success mentors from our community based organization will lead the development of a stronger, more active student council to serve as a voice of change for fostering a more engaging curriculum. Students, 11/18-6/19 Consultants, Teachers, Families Administration, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. To bridge the communication gap between the school and home community, the parent coordinator will facilitate open houses and workshops that foster a deeper understanding of supportive environments. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Learning Communities, CBO school day support with various programs aligned to schools data and the CCLS, consultants and social worker Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. MOSL Student Survey By January 2018, 100% of classrooms will display evidence of student centered learning activities and guided reading instructional groups as evidenced by classroom observations and ADVANCE. 9  Students below benchmark reading levels should have moved at least 2-3 independent reading levels. Students at benchmark levels should have moved at least 1-2 independent reading levels as evidence by the Assessment Pro, reading tracking system. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Schoolnet beginning and end of year data analysis report for MOSL Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Moving forward for 2018-19 the needs assessment remains the same. Although teachers met for common planning and attended Monday Professional Development sessions, this work was mostly supported by the administrative/coach cabinet and consultants. Teachers were guided through protocols for looking at student work, but lacked the ability to make collective decisions that tracked patterns and trends around instruction and student learning for all students including ELLs and SWDs. There is a need to embed effective and high quality professional learning that is purposeful and tied to educator and student outcomes through Professional Learning Teams with teacher leaders that have shown growth through student achievement data this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teachers will develop skill sets that are purposeful, data driven and tied to student outcomes resulting in a 5% increase of ELLs reaching proficiency on the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In order to develop greater instructional coherence and provide opportunities for teachers to think deeply about their practice, the school will create a professional development 'road map' that begins with ELL instructional strategies derived from QTEL. Professional Learning (PL) teams will analyze a variety of student data (e.g. state exams, individual examples of student work and and additional formative assessments) for all students including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. For the first learning cycle, the school will begin the initial goal-setting around a problem of practice related to ELL instruction. Instructional rounds, inter visitations and ADVANCE observations will be used to monitor implementation and effectiveness of the practice. PL teams will set future goals, incorporate these strategies into daily instructional practice and monitor their effectiveness to impact student growth. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers 9/18 - 6/19 Administration, literacy coach, consultants Teachers 9/18-9/19 Teachers 9/18-9/19 Administration, literacy coach and consultants Administration, literacy coach and consultants The school will assess PL effectiveness at the end of each learning cycle in order to adjust the professional development road map to meet teachers' and teams' needs. Teachers 9/18 - 6/19 Administration, literacy coach, consultants Finally, results will be shared in the form of feedback and best practices to build coherence across the school community. Teachers 9/18-9/19 Administration, literacy coach and consultants 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Use of Academic Parent teacher sessions across all grades 3x per year Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Admin time, Literacy coach time (Weekly during professional development sessions, consultants 1X per week, Math Consultants 1 x per week, ELL Consultant 1X per week, teacher time, after school team planning, per session. 2  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Professional Learning teams will look at feedback from instructional rounds, intervisitations and observations. Student growth will be demonstrated in writing about reading through the On-Demand writing tasks and the final published piece for each writing unit. The rubric used to score the writing traits will demonstrate a least a .5 increase for students below and approaching grade level. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers College On-demand writing tasks results across units from fall 2018 to spring 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year administration developed teacher leadership capacity by structuring teacher teams that worked collaboratively to grow teacher pedagogy and knowledge of content through each others feedback. Priority will be given to new initiatives like Universal Literacy and sharing best practices from our Reading Recovery coach. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher leaders/mentors will be developed across the different content areas to build and cultivate instructional best practices in other adult learners resulting in a 5% increase in teachers moving up one performance level on the HEDI scale in Domain 1 1a: Demonstrating knowledge of content and pedagogy. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teacher leaders identified in previous year will receive training/coaching to act as leaders for PL teams. Administration will use the New Teacher Mentoring Program to develop mentors and further build teacher capacity across the school community to support all learners. Administration will establish model classrooms to nurture teacher leadership by creating a learning opportunity where teachers will observe best reading practices in a print rich environment. This practice will be facilitated through the support of both the Reading Recovery and Universal Literacy coaches. Academic Parent Teacher Teams will now span across all grades Kindergarten through 8th grade. Teachers will work alongside parents to support academic success through sessions that invite parents to better understand the data of their children and how to support them academically at home. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Admin 9/18-6/19 Principal, Admin, coach 9/18-6/19 Principal Admin, coach 9/18-6/19 Principal Parents 9/18-6/19 Principal, Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent coordinator will engage in workshops for the various initiatives and via parent surveys. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ADVANCE on going per year, mentor/lead teacher daily schedules, Support from the Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach (TDEC) 1X per month. New Teacher Center coaching sessions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 100% of teachers will have been evaluated at least twice in Domain 1 component 1a resulting in at least 50% of teachers being rated effective or higher. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Assess teachers using the MOTP data in ADVANCE, in H-E-D-I rating scale from the Framework for Teaching rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Due to the extensive communication and workshops provided to families the percentage of accurately completed parent surveys was substantially higher than in previous years. For this reason the School Leadership Team` has planned to analyze the surveys for important data so that moving forward workshops can go deeper in support of parents' needs. The school will foster “Community School” characteristics by working closely with the CBO, Children’s Aid Society, in order to build stronger partnerships that nourish a welcoming environment for families and better use of the Parent Resource Room. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will provide opportunities for parents to engage with school events like APTT and other students centered activities which will result in a 5% increase (from 70% to 75 %) in the percent of parents who will agree or strongly agree that they have had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school. (Q4a) as measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Increase parent participation in workshops, meeting and conferences by improving the school’s communication and promotion of events. Improve the system for teacher/guidance counselors/PC accountability as related to parent outreach (per United Federation Teachers) contract sessions. Parents 9/18-6/19 Principal, Parent Coordinator Parents, counselor, PC 9/18-6/19 Principal Implement feedback system for parent workshops and interactions; conduct ongoing revisions based on feedback. Parents 9/18-6/19 Principal, Parent Coordinator Increase parental attendance during Tuesday parent/teacher time. Parents, 9/18-6/19 Principal Conduct workshops for parent of English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities to support using strategies and resources in the home. Teachers 9/18-6/19 Parents, Teachers, Administration Principal, ELL Coordinator, Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Children's Aid Society Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrator time, teacher time, counselor time, Parent Coordinator full time, miscellaneous office supplies, budget resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 8  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monitor Parent Coordinator attendance tracking system to assure that attendance at parent workshops increases from 20 from the beginning of the year to 40 parents. Monitor parent feedback from workshop through end-of-session feedback surveys. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) After administering assessments students that are not meeting criteria receive a more intense reading intervention. This means that teachers meet with group of students at least 3x a week. Targeted students will also receive additional reading intervention support in the after school program at least 2x a week. After administering assessments students that are not meeting criteria receive a more intense math intervention. This means that teachers meet with groups of students at least 3x a week. Targeted students will also receive additional math intervention support in the after school program at least 1x a week. Science teachers use English Language Arts Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Rigby Guided Reading Program Small Group Language Power to support ELLs and SWD During school day and after school National Training Network Math Program Small Group During School Day After School Building back ground knowledge with videos, vocabulary development and Small Group Regular School Day Collaborative Project 0  data to identify struggling students. project based learning. Based Learning Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) After administering assessments students that are not meeting criteria receive a more intense intervention. This means that teachers meet with groups of students at least 3x a week. Students attend after school program as well 2x a week. Students receive services based on attendance data and teacher recommendation and data from class tracking sheets Close Reading Small Group During school day After-school Learn2Earn incentive program Small Group During the school day One-One Behavior Modification Plan 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 69 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students are provided with uniforms, school supplies, at-risk counseling and after-school support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 71 students 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  uniforms, supplies, bags, personal hygiene, graduation expenses. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title ! school and funding for STH is embedded in the allocation. 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. CS211 provides instruction by highly qualified teachers. One hundred percent (100%) of the teachers are fully licensed and assigned to the school. More than sixty-five percent (65%) of CS211 teachers have more than two years of teaching experience in the school. Over fifty percent (50%) of the teachers have more than five years of teaching experience. More than sixty-three percent (63%) of our teachers have achieved a Master’s Degree or higher. Our learning community at CS211 affords highly qualified teachers the opportunity to participant in various stimulating and challenging professional development activities. This is made possible by the flexibility of our funds and the coordinated efforts of our experienced administration, literacy coach, consultants and other talented educators. Recruitment: Teachers are hired from recognized programs such Teach for America (TFA) and Teaching Fellows. Our newly hired teachers receive mentoring support from these programs as well. Retention: Individual mentors for new teachers via NTC. D-12 A Literacy Coach provides ELA curriculum support to all K through 8 th grade ELA teachers A Math consultant provides on-going support to all K through 8 th grade Math teachers An ENL consultant provides on-going support to all K through 8 th ENL /ELA and Bilingual teachers Professional Development at the school is provided based on teacher survey/needs Teachers are teamed based on subject or grade assessment Assignment: 4  All teaching assignments are made according to NYS license area Teacher preference sheets Teacher Support is offered at CS211 through: School Administrators, both DOE and NTC D-12 Mentoring, grade or subject teams, Literacy Coach, outside consultants. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers will participate in ongoing professional development provided by the Literacy Coach (for ELA), and ENL Consultant, an NTN consultant (for Math). Paraprofessionals and staff will receive professional development from Individualized Educational Plan teacher, consultants and from school administration. Principals will receive professional development from the superintendent’s office and other off-site supports. Both Administration, mentees and mentors will attend D-12 NTC sessions that to support new teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 5  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). CS211 houses an early childhood program sponsored by CAS with students who will transition into one of our Kindergarten classes. Families are invited for an orientation in May and then again in September to ensure that home and school are connected in supporting the social-emotional and academic needs of transitioning Kindergarten students. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher Effectiveness Team convened to decide on the MOSL for the assessments for the 2015-2016 school year. Teachers are invited to adapt curriculum for ELA and Math programs that we have adopted. Teachers also have the opportunity to provide administration with feedback on our local assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Title I Part A (Basic) Federal 554,362.00 X Section 5B Section 5C section 5D Section 5E 6  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 115,281.00 16,590.00 0 4,116,551.00 X X X Section 5B,C,D,E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 7  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 211, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. CS211 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ●providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ●fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ●sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 9  ●providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ●conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ●host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 0  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ●schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ●holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ●hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ●establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ●encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ●providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) [CS211] , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 1  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers COMPLETE I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act. Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 3  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ●promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 4  ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 5  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The integration of Children’s Aid and C.S. 211 continues to improve. Convergence has occurred in instruction, attendance, mentoring, parent engagement and the social emotional well-being of the 211 community. In each domain, the collaboration of services provides multi-tiered supports for families. Academically, Reading Rescue and Lightning Squad are used to move struggling readers in grades K-3. Success Mentors served as tutors in our pilot year. Scaling up these initiatives and building a literacy culture throughout the building are key strategies the partnership is pursuing. Children’s Aid After School programs supports nearly 50 % of C.S. 211’s population. Support for literacy instruction in middle school is delivered via an Adolescent Literacy grant. With the grant renewed in FY18, a new cohort of C.S. 211 6th graders joined the program this year. Participating students receive instruction from school day pedagogues in small groups. At least 2 teachers support this work. Students participating in Adolescent Literacy remain in the cohort until they reach a level 3 on the state ELA test or graduation. Attendance continues to drive the collaboration. It is an entry point for the mental health team to service the economic, social & emotional, and health needs of families. C.S. 211 finished this year with an average daily attendance rate of 94.15%. Success Mentors partnerships with teachers, students, and families have created seamless supports for students. These supports have grown organically; leadership is no longer driving these connections. Parent engagement continues to evolve. APTT implementation arrived school-wide. Children’s Aid supports and provides the on-site technical assistance and operational supports to teachers and administrators. Student-teacher-parent workshops continue to grow; this year families built ginger bread houses, read at cozy reading and literacy night events, and practiced math and ELA activities during APTT. Families engaged in activities where all stakeholders could leave their roles aside to connect informally. Relationship development continues to be a priority for the partnership. Breaking barriers between families & teachers is a critical step for high functioning Community School. Social emotional health and supports were overloaded this year. The departure of two key personnel, finding the replacement, and a vacancy remaining open due to short supply of candidates hurt this domain. Incidents increased as a product of inconsistent implementation of SEL practice in the classroom. Children’s Aid continues to provide support with City Connects, a resource coordination platform, used to track services and the needs of students in kindergarten through fifth grade. The partnership’s focus is fidelity in SEL implementation. Children’s Aid mental health team will support restorative justice implementation and the creation of a PBIS system for the school. Coaching teachers and ensuring fidelity will be the primary supports. Integrating Edge coaching will continue in SY18-19. Each domain contributes to a student’s academic ability. Students received more supports this year than the previous. Developing systematic models for integration, fidelity, and analysis will continue throughout the summer. Scaling up a systems approach to practice should alleviate challenges faced by school personnel, provide better academic and social emotional supports to improve the school's academic standing. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 6 By September 2018, the partnership will develop a coherent SEL implementation plan. Combining the mixture of piloted initiatives into a workable plan with coaching supports and fidelity tests will yield better results. We are looking for a 20% incident reduction. By October 2018, the partnership will develop a workable model for APTT implementation with a focus on outreach and facilitating the process for families. By January 2019, the partnership will increase student engagement by developing leadership paths. Student governance and participation in leadership bodies like the SLT and CST will be in place. By June 2019, the partnership will raise average daily attendance to 94.7 %. By November 2018, coordinated literacy supports will double its capacity. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? All submitted goals connect to the academic growth of our students. Consistency in attendance, parent involvement, and SEL supports should curb disruptions contributing to a better learning climate. Families receiving services from the partnership contribute more to school community and are more receptive to making changes to improve outcomes. The interconnectedness of each domain requires the constant refinement to move students academically. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Attendance supports Target Population Whole School/ Chronic Absentees ELT: Targeted Academic 40 students Intervention, Reading Rescue & Lightning Squad Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Success Mentors will provide a cohort of chronic absentee’s support. They will also be responsible for monitoring their assigned grades for students that may become at risk Success Mentors and after school staff will provide small group instruction and individual remediation. By June 2019, attendance for C.S. 211 will grow to 94..7% ADA and reduce chronic absentees by 5 % school wide By February 2019, coordinated literacy supports will double its capacity to serve 40 students between grades K-3rd. ELT: Student Leadership 3-8th Grade CSD will coordinate By January 2019, the partnership will 7  student led activities and events. .A student leadership council will be create increase student engagement by developing leadership paths. Student governance and Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teacher time, professional development, and schedule adjustments. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Our agency has a unique advantage in C.S. 211; we are the lead partner for all collocated schools. We provide multiple services and sit on the SLT’s for both public schools. The charter school in the building services are coordinated by their Community School Director. The Community School Director and Assistant Community School Director manage all services for C.S. 211. Children’s Aid serves as our lead CBO partner and supports: · All after school programs · Attendance supports · Parent and Family Engagement · Mental health supports · SEL implementation The CSD uses the SLT and other venues to discuss Community School priorities like attendance and ELT. CSD works with 8  the PTA to implement the ladders of engagement. Community Forum, APTT, and multiple parent engagement workshops stretch our opportunities to assess the effectiveness of our services and better understand the needs of our families. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students We are the primary support for all rendered services or 211. The table below lists all CAS staff. Full Time Community School Director Assistant Community School Director Parent Engagement Coordinator Program Director (3) City Connects Coordinator Office Manager Data Coordinator Social Worker Part Time Success Mentors (8) After School Staff (45) Office Support (4) Operations Teachers (6) Social Work Interns Children’s Aid is the lead partner and only CBO in C.S. 211. Partnerships with One-Stop, Alvin Ailey, South Bronx Rising Together, Pediatrics 2000, Masa, and New York Tennis League all contribute to the supports we provide families. We work with Lehman College to get additional SW interns and have solidified partnerships with Stanley Isaacs Community Center and Mercy College. We work collaboratively with Food Bank to provide a school-based pantry. . We have weekly meetings with our core team. This includes all CAS personnel. Our meetings beginwith updates from each unit. We are revisiting this practice as it takes a large amount of time. Meetings then move to the coordination of services amongst our internal team. We plan, discuss, and review upcoming projects and ensure we conduct an after-action review for completed projects. CST meetings will be centered on the four domains. We will deliver updates to each component including PTA, SLT, and new initiatives. With clear goals, we want the CST to promote and troubleshoot school challenges as they appear. They should facilitate and in some cases lead some aspects of the work. Every year, the CSD analyses data provided to CAS through the RESI. Combining this with information collected the previous year, the data sorter, City Connects data and case notes from our Success Mentors we work to personalize services. Our strategic focus for year 3 o will remain Standardizing and Improving Practice(SIP). This process will formalize key inputs for our practice; that is, they are non-negotiable and therefore standardized. As an agency and a site, we have moved to Plan, Do, Study, and Act cycle. All elements of our services will experiment with slight changes to non-standardized elements. We need innovate in certain areas of our practice to accomplish our shared outcomes. This cycle provides us the structure to promote continuous improvement. 9  Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. · Weekly check-ins with key school personnel. · Weekly Success Summits · Teacher/Mentor Meetings · Alignment between After School and Day Practices · Mentor/Facilitator day school observations · Family Engagement Monthly Meetings Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. We are in operation year-round. · Attendance Supports 8/28/17 -6/30/17 · Health & Wellness (year-round) · Family Engagement (year-round) · ELT (09/12/18 – 06/18/19) Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 0 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm 2. 3. Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: C.S. 211 This school is (check one): DBN: 12X211 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Based on the results of summative and formative assessments we know that a significant percentage of our ELL students are not performing at the levels required by the Common Core Learning Standards. First, we analyzed the results of the 2018 NYSESLAT to determine students who demonstrated some growth in English proficiency and are close to progressing to the next level (pushable) or are just barely over the next level (slippable). Then we cross-referenced the 2018 ELA scores of those students and found a group of about 30 students who have low ELA scores but are demonstrating progress in language acquisition (NYSESLAT). By providing enrichment activities such as conversation practice, reading and writing and other literacy activities, we will be able to strengthen the English language skills they have and develop them across all modalities. Subgroups and grade levels: For this reason we will focus on the ELLs in Grades 6-8, (including SIFE and Long-term ELLs) that will be testing in 2019, providing supplementary support in developing their linguistic skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing. We will look at student performance in each of the language modalities and then embed instruction to address the students’ needs as appropriate. We will also provide professional development to ensure teachers are prepared to deliver the instruction students need. Schedule and duration: Direct supplementary instruction will be provided in an extended day program that will be held every Wednesday and Thursday beginning in November 2018 and continuing until April 2019 for a total of 38 sessions. Sessions will go from 2:30pm to 4:30pm. Language of Instruction: Instruction will be provided in English, with native language support and other language scaffolds as necessary. Teachers: Three teachers will provide instruction. They are all certified in either bilingual education or TESOL. Students will be grouped by grade and proficiency levels. There will be three classes, each with a teacher:student ratio of 1:10. *6th/7th/8th Grade – Entering and Emerging *6th/7th/8th Grade – Transitioning *6th/7th/8th Grade – Expanding/Commanding Types of materials: Students will be engaged in academic activities that will help them develop language. Materials that will be used will include leveled reading books, practice workbooks and other related tools.. Attendance will be maintained in a binder in the main office. 2  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Topic 1: Looking at ELL Data Rationale: By looking at ELL students’ performance data from the previous school year we can get a better understanding of students' progress, conduct a gap analysis of the data, and determine how effective our instruction was and where we need to improve based on our specific students’ needs. · Projected Dates: November 2018 Time: 2:30-3:40 PM Name of Provider: CS 211 Administration Topic 2: Adapting and Implementing Writing Rubrics for ELLs Rationale: Teachers in the Title III program will attend this PD that will focus on understanding our writing rubrics for ELLs and implementing them. This will help the teachers to provide meaningful feedback on writing to ELLs at the different language acquisition levels. This will support student learning and progress in writing. Date: 2 sessions in November 2018 Time: TBD Provider: CS 211 staff All agendas and attendance sheets will be kept in a binder in the main office. Teachers to receive training:&nbsp; All teachers and paraprofessionals rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: Topic 1: Title III Information Session for Parents Rationale: Parents will be informed about the goals, structure and purpose of the Title III after school program for their children. Provider: CS 211 ENL Teacher Schedule and duration: 2 sessions in November 2018 How parents will be notified: Flyers sent home with students translated into the parents' preferred language of communication, posters in the school, word-of-mouth. Topic 2: Brain Power for Parents 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Rationale: Parents will receive a Brain Power session to teach them strategies to support social/emotional development for children. Provider: Brain Power Schedule and duration: 2 sessions in December 2018 How parents will be notified: Flyers sent home with students translated into the parents' preferred language of communication, posters in the school, word-of-mouth. Topic 3: Arts and Language Development Rationale: Parents will participate in a workshop to learn about how art can be used to develop language. Provider: Urban Word NYC Schedule and duration: 2 sessions in January 2019 How parents will be notified: Flyers sent home with students translated into the parents' preferred language of communication, posters in the school, word-of-mouth. All agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parents' preferred language will be kept in a binder in the main office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per Session for teachers for direct instruction, professional development and parent engagement activities. Brain Power coach; LEAP teaching artist Books, workbooks and other supplies for direct instruction as well as materials for professional development and parent engagement activities. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. 13,828.00 1,872.00 890.00 Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A 4  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. complete 16,590 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Community School 211 Borough Bronx School Number 211 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Tanya Drummond Coach Sheila Mason ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Sonia Velez Teacher/Subject Area Faith Dunn/ELA Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Rafaela Espinal Assistant Principal Howard R. Macdonald Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Lillian Pucha Parent Coordinator Virginia Menendez Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 590 6 Total number of ELLs 150 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 25.42%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use Running Records, MOSLs, DRA in Spanish, teacher-created assessments, exit slips, student portfolios, and formative data tracking of daily lessons to prepare small-group instruction and RtI. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Weekly common planning across grades and content areas, units of study shared through GoogleDocs, flexible groups by NYSESLAT level, guided reading by F&P level, Running Records completed 4 times per year across the school, student growth portfolios shared across grade levels, teachers use data trackers in all grades and content areas 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 7  We use NYS achievement tests (NYSESLAT, ELA, Math, Science, ELE), SIFE screener data, MOSLs, prerequisite skills assessment in math. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We analyze assessment data (NY State ELA and Math tests, NYSESLAT, running records, MOSLs, etc.) with a lens of ELL progress. We evaluate the amount of progress that ELLs are making, based on NYS guidelines and using the EDAT. We also compare the results of students in ELL programs with the schoolwide results to identify gaps that need to be addressed. In common planning, teachers share data and look at student work to adjust curriculum and to plan instruction that meets the needs of students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Classroom teachers analyze baseline data (NYS assessments, MOSLs, etc.) as well as formative data (running records, portfolios, etc.) to determine small groups for Tier 1 intervention (i.e. guided reading and math). Teachers deliver intervention based on student needs and adjust the flexible gourps based on student work and other formative assessment data. Tier 2 interventions are provided as needed based on student work and formative data. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We study the results of the NYSESLAT modalities both at individual grade levels and schoolwide. Through this teachers are able to see where students have greater strengths and challenges. They also do a gap analysis using the results from NYS ELA tests to know which students need more emphasis on certain modalities and standards, and plan accordingly. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data analysis is shared with teachers schoolwide during Monday professional development time. Teachers do a deeper investigation of the data during common planning time Professional Learning teams to adjust curricula and pacing, to plan scaffolds and differentiation, and to choose materials. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL students receive ENL from a TESOL-certified teacher using a push-in/pull-out model. Students are grouped by grade in heterogeneous block classes. Students receive stand alone ENL according to CR part 154 requirements through a combination of, pull-out sessions for Entering/Emerging students, and push-in sessions during ELA. Students receive integrated ENL according to the requirements through push-in instruction during ELA, math and science classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. Students in TBE classes receive ENL from a teacher certified in bilingual education. Students are grouped by grade in heterogeneous block classes. Students receive HLA as mandated by CR Part 154. They also receive Math, Science and Social Studies in their home language. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 8  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Freestanding ENL – ENL is provided by a TESOL certified teacher. Depending on the proficiency levels of students, the teacher delivers the mandated number of minutes. For Entering and Emerging students, ENL is delivered either as a pull-out or in push-in sessions. The teacher pushes-in to ELA. For Transitioning and Expanding students the teacher primarily pushes-in to ELA and leads small-group instruction. The teacher also pushes-in to content area classes to deliver ENL instruction and to support the development of academic language in the content areas. ELA is provided by the certified ELA teacher. These teachers have received professional development and support in effective ENL methodologies. There are ELLs at all proficiency levels in the Freestanding ENL program. TBE – ENL is delivered by a bilingual certified teacher. For Entering and Emergent proficiency levels dedicated ENL time is provided through small groups. For Transitioning and Emerging proficiency levels ENL is incorporated into ELA and other core content areas. HLA is also delivered by this teacher. There are ELLs at all proficiency levels in the TBE classes except Commanding.DL - N/A 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Freestanding ENL – Core content is delivered by appropriately certified teachers at each grade level. Instruction is delivered 100% in English and teachers are trained in using ESL methodologies. Some of these include: using the Freyer model to develop academic vocabulary, the Picture Word Induction Model, and QTEL discussion strategies like Round Robin and Fish Bowl. The school uses TC for ELA writing and EngageNY & Go Math in the elementary grades. In the middle school grades the school uses TC for ELA and EngageNY for Math.TBE – Core content is delivered by appropriately certified teachers who also have bilingual extensions. ELA is delivered primarily in English, with teachers using native language and other scaffolds as needed. Math, science and social studies are delivered in Spanish, with English used to develop academic language as determined by students’ proficiency levels. DL - N/A 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At the beginning of the year, two assessments are completed to evaluate home language: a running record using DRA in Spanish and a writing baseline in their home language. In the TBE program, during the year, students complete classroom assessments to evaluate their progress in their home language. Teachers use ongoing formative assessments regularly, including quick checks, assessment questions and tasks that are assessed for comprehension. Teachers track these formative assessments using a data tracking sheet. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE – Scaffolds are provided including home language, word walls, graphic organizers, small-group instruction. All testing accomodations are followed including extended time, bilingual dictionaries, etc.b. Newcomer - Scaffolds are provided including home language, word walls, graphic organizers, small-group instruction. All testing accomodations are followed including extended time, bilingual dictionaries, etc.c. Developing – Scaffolds are used but are discontinued as needed. All testing accommodations are followed including extended time, bilingual dictionaries, etc.d. Long Term – Use of native language scaffold is reduced, but other scaffolds remain as necessary. Testing accommodations are followed.e. Former ELLs – Students receive .5 units of ENL service each week. They are expected to perform appropriately. Language scaffolds are employed as necessary based on ongoing observation and assessment. Students receive testing accommodations including extended time for 2 years after exiting ELL status. 9  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The grade-level materials we use are based on the TCRWP for ELA, and Go Math and EngageNY for Math, Glencoe Science and the NYC Passport to Social Studies. The math, science and social studies materials come in translated versions for the TBE program. We also have a computer lab where students receive technology instruction and use eRead and Report, and MyON - levelled ereader programs. Students use their independent reading levels, they are also able to read or listen to the stories (depending on the level). Students also have access to classroom computers for listening centers, reading practice and publishing.To help ELL-SWDs accelerate their English Language development teachers front-load vocabulary, help students access prior knowledge, build background knowledge, use visual aids and realia, and use scaffolds like graphic organizers and native language support. The IEP teacher regularly reviews IEPs and schedules with teachers to ensure that ELL-SWDs receive all mandated services. If an IEP mandates bilingual instruction the school accomodates that if we have the class. If not they receive Freestanding ESL or they are recommended to another school. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency the school monitors students' progress through regular assessments and IEP review. When appropriate, students push-in to mainstream classrooms for ELA or Mathematics. The teachers use small-group instruction to provide instruction that meets students' needs and ongoing formative assessments are used to assure that students are progressing adequately. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Teachers use ongoing formative assessments to create guided reading and math groups. When more intervention is needed the teachers use RtI. RtI is conducted in English for ELLS in Freestanding ENL classes, with teachers using native language support if possible and only when necessary. RtI for students in TBE classes is conducted in English for ELA and in the native language for Math.As part of our Title III funding we offer an afterschool program for ELLs that is focused on ENL for Long-Term ELLs and ELLs that are at Transitioning and Expanding levels. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have trained teachers to develop language objectives in all of their lessons and we monitor the implementation. Teachers will receive continue to receive support and training to imrove this. They also receive ongoing Professional Development on guided reading and math and implementation is monitored. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We do not plan to discontinue any programs/services for ELLs at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are invited to participate in all school programs. All information about programs is shared with parents in the language of their choice. We have an afterschool program provided by a CBO that includes all students in homogeneous groups. They participate in homework help, recreational activities and interest clubs. We have a marching band that includes many ELLs. We also have afterschool ELA and Math classes which include ELLs, that are targeted for students at different levels. Finally, we have a Title III ESL Academy for ELLs are invited to participate in all school programs. All information about programs are shared with parents in the language of their choice. We have an afterschool program provided by a CBO that includes all students in homogeneous groups. They participate in homework help, recreational activities and interest clubs. We also have afterschool ELA and Math classes, which include ELLs, that are targeted for students at different levels. Finally, we have a Title III ESL Academy for ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 0  ELA: TCRWP, adapted for ELLs using ESL methodologies and scaffolds; Math: Engage NY and Go Math for Elementary grades; EngageNY for middle school, translated materials for TBE classesTechnology: eRead & Report, MyON - texts are levelled and have play-aloud capability 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? TBE: Teachers use the home language as a scaffold to support English-langauge comprehension. This scaffolding takes the form of discussion strategies (QTEL), using the Freyer model to develop academic vocabulary.ENL: Home language support is delivered only when the classroom teacher speaks the home language of the student. Peer tutoring can be used if other students speak the home language.DL: N/A 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Appropriateness of required services/resources is monitored by the administration through ongoing observations, classroom visits, coaching, mentoring, professional development and follow-up. This monitoring includes lesson plan reviews, portfolio/folder reviews, conversations about practice, intervisitation logs, logs of assistance and conferencing with teachers. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not currently share ENL resources with other schools in the building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELLs we have organized a Welcome Packet that includes a parent component. This packet includes information the student will need about the school and about the community. This packet is shared with students during the initial conference when they complete the HLIS. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We have no language electives at CS 211. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We have developed a plan to meet the requirements for CL Part 154 in Professional Development. All teachers will receive professional development around requirements for ELLs, interpreting ELL data, writing and implementing language objectives and using ELL instructional methodologies. All of our bilingual and ENL teachers will receive other more focused professional development to strengthen their skills at assessing ELLs, implementing ELL methodologies and improving ELL progress. A consultant provided by the Fordham University RBERN provides focused support of ELLs and CCLS. These sessions will support teachers to utilize the Targets of Measurement and BCCI Progressions for ENL and HLA. 1  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In addition to citywide professional development days, teachers meet every Monday for 80 minutes after school. We have a PD calendar where we map out all sessions. The school also has contracted consultants in ELA and Math to provide ongoing PD and support. The consultants work with teachers in their classrooms and meet in planning and feedback sessions. Agendas and attendance sign-ins for every session are kept in the Principal’s office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Once the Fall DOE parent-teacher conferences are completed the school will hold a parent meeting with the parents of ELLs to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. This meeting will include the Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator, ENL teachers, TBE teachers and other content-area teachers. The meeting will be conducted in English and Spanish, and additional translation will be arranged as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are very involved with the school. In our TBE classes, teachers report high percentages of parent attendance parent-teacher conferences. In other classes, parents of ELLs usually attend. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Tanya Drummond, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: C.S. 211 School DBN: 12X211 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Tanya Drummond Title Principal Howard R. Macdonald Assistant Principal Virginia Menendez Parent Coordinator Sonia Velez Lillian Pucha ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Faith Dunn/ELA Teacher/Subject Area N/A Sheila Mason N/A N/A Rafaela Espinal N/A N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 N/A 6/23/17 N/A N/A 6/23/17 N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X211 School Name: C.S. 211 Superintendent: JaquelineRosad The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Virginia Menendez Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on ATS data of our school population, 28% of our school's population are English Language Learners (ELLs). We have reviewed the results of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) and found that English and Spanish are the languages spoken by the great majority of our parents. French, Bengali and Ewe are the only other languages preferred by parents, as indicated by the RCPL report. When we found parents that indicated a preferred language that we could not translate using staff in the school, we surveyed them individually to find out if written translation and oral interpretation was needed. To identify the parents of non-ELLs who cannot communicate in English, our office staff and ENL pedagogues review Part III of the HLIS. When a parent indicates a language other than English or a language spoken by our staff, they are identified for an interview to survey them for translation and interpretation needs. Any parent who indicates a need or a preference for translation and/or interpretation is added to a list maintained in the main office. 5  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish French Bengali Ewe 501 355 3 2 1 58.12 41.18 0.35 0.23 0.12 499 357 3 2 1 57.89 41.42 0.35 0.23 0.12 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Calendar of school holidays, events September Parent-teacher conference announcements October, March After-school program permissions and information November Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Calendar will be translated using in-house personnel. It will be sent home with students. For languages not covered by staff, the Language Line will be accessed for the document to be read over the phone. Announcements will be translated using in-house personnel. It will be sent home with students. For languages not covered by staff, the Language Line will be accessed for the document to be read over the phone. Documents will be translated using in-house personnel. They will be sent home with students. For languages not covered by staff, the Language Line will be accessed for the document to be read over the phone. 6  Letter reminding families of testing dates March Letter will translated using in-house personnel. It will be sent home with students. For languages not covered by staff, the Language Line will be accessed for the document to be read over the phone. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open school night (APTT 1) September Academic Parent-Teacher Teams (APTT 2) November, Academic Parent-Teacher Teams (APTT 3) March Academic Parent-Teacher Teams (APTT 4) May interpretation service(s)? Spanish interpretation services will be provided by school staff. Other language interpretation services will be provided by DOE interpretation office and the use of the Language Line, as needed. When parents indicate a need for interpretation services we will invite an interpreter or will contact the Language Line service for a conference call. Spanish interpretation services will be provided by school staff. Other language interpretation services will be provided by DOE interpretation office and the use of the Language Line, as needed. When parents indicate a need for interpretation services we will invite an interpreter or will contact the Language Line service for a conference call. Spanish interpretation services will be provided by school staff. Other language interpretation services will be provided by DOE interpretation office and the use of the Language Line, as needed. When parents indicate a need for interpretation services we will invite an interpreter or will contact the Language Line service for a conference call. Spanish interpretation services will be provided by school staff. Other language interpretation services will be provided by DOE interpretation office and the use of the Language Line, as needed. When parents indicate a need 7  for interpretation services we will invite an interpreter or will contact the Language Line service for a conference call. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school is able to provide communication to nearly all families using in-house personnel. For other families, in the event of an emergency the school will use the DOE Language Line. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. At beginning-of -year staff meetings, Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is reviewed with the staff and available resources are shared with the staff, including in-house translation/interpretation, DOE Language Line and DOE translation services. This information is reiterated to staff prior to open school night and each Academic Parent-Teacher Teams session. In preparation for each APTT session, administration and our CBO (Children's Aid Society) provide training and support for teachers, including language access resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Notification of parental rights and availability for language assistance are communicated to parents through bilingual signs in the school lobby, bilingual flyers/letters sent home with students and through PTA meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will provide parents with feedback forms after all formal school-parent events. Following the events, administration meets to discuss parent feedback. 8 
