2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): School Name: 12X212 P.S. 212 Principal: FATIMAH ALI 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Multicultural Magnet School 321200010212 Pre-K-5 1180 TintonAvenue Bronx, NY 10456 School Number (DBN): 12x212 718-842-2331 Phone Number: 718-842-8677 Fax: FatimahAli FAli@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: FatimahAli Hyacinth Hall Franklyn Williamson ChavaPenzias Mitchell Samuel N/A N/A Phipps Community Director Ms. Johnson CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 12 Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road, Bronx, NY,10460 Superintendent’s Office Address: jrosado4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-2310 Phone Number: 718-542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: One FordhamPlaza room808, Bronx, NY nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) FatimahAli Hyacinth Hall Franklyn Williamson JaniraColon Mitchell Samuel na na Ms. Johnson Paola Williams ChavaPenzias SylviaBartholomew *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/UFT- Chairperson Member/ UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Melissa Montesano LaToyaSkillman YeseniaGonzalez Member/ UFT Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? In partnership with parents and the community, P.S. 212 is dedicated to putting the individual student at the center of learning through engaging, rigorous, and creative instruction coupled with strong social-emotional supports designed to ignite a student's love for self-expansion. Students are encouraged to "shine their light" and to recognize the "light" in others on their journey towards discovering their integral place in the world.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. After 4 Principals in 10 years, P.S. 212 is in its second year of its improvement phase. The school has gone through significant structural and staff shifts since September 2017. Last year, we were both an Elementary and Middle School; however, the Middle School was truncated, and many staff were excessed. P.S. 212 is currently an elementary school with mostly veteran staff members. We have small class size with up to 2 classes per grade. We currently offer an I.C.T. class in kindergarten, first-grade and third-grade. We have 2 ESL teachers, 3 Cluster teachers for art, music, and physical education. In alignment with our mission to educate the whole child, we support social-emotional development through a combination of restorative and healing practices including restorative circles and daily morning affirmations. In addition, students write self-reflective journal entries, which provide them with the time and space to recognize their own thoughts, feelings and mindfulness. Simultaneously, we believe that exposing students to the visual and performing arts is essential for intellectual, artistic, and social-emotional growth. Teachers are sent to Restorative Practices Training to ensure a fidelity of implementation. The school also purchased and SEL curriculum to help foster those conversations. We also participate in cookshop. Unfortunately, following the Middle School truncation, our budget was cut significantly, because our Pre-K - 5 projected enrollment was higher than the actual number of students enrolled. As a result, we do not have enough funding to hire any support staff such as Reading and Math coaches, AIS support, or any additional Arts teachers. To augment some of this fiscal deficit, this year we will be working in partnership with our community school CBO, Phipps, to fund after-school programs in academics and music for students in grades 2-5. We also received the LEAP grant, which will ensure that teachers will work with performing visiting artists to improve student engagement with their Common Core curriculum. We also have Omni learn is hands-on Science program for 4th grade. We also have a partnership with Sobro will be providing hydroponics program for the 1st and 3rd graders. There also a partnership with Community Change for our 2nd grade students after-school program (legacy) to explore their identity. Summary: We holistically prepare our students for middle school and beyond by emphasizing holistic education through academics, the arts, and social-emotional development. Teachers align instruction to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and develop well-designed learning activities that result in the intellectual engagement of all students. Each learning experience provides opportunities for students to develop higher-order thinking skills through strategically designed questions and by expanding academic vocabulary development through meaningful class discussions. Simultaneously, we want our students to experience the balance of learning content and experiential learning that also comes from dance, music, visual art, sports, chess, and play. Finally, while all school stakeholders collaborate to monitor and share student progress, P.S. 212X has a solid P.T.A. that works with our Parent Coordinator to plan and communicate with parents regarding various events, including Harvest Day Parade, Harvest Ball, SHINE Assemblies, Art and Music Showcases. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Multicultural Magnet School (X212) services students in grades Pre-K-5 with a population of approximately 190 students. The average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 89%. The student body consists of 60% Hispanics, 37% Black, and 3% other. There are 49% males and 51% females; 20% of the population are ENLs and 14% Students with Disabilities. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 0  Areas of Focus Showing Progress: 1. Rigorous Instruction Rigorous Curriculum and Student-Centered Instruction Our 2018-19 focus continues to be on ensuring that teachers plan for students using the co-created lesson component essentials template as a guide. In addition, we will continue to focus on Danielson component 1e school-wide as we transition to more child- centered instructional methods, which follow the gradual release method. In this way, the school-wide structure teachers will continue to utilize is: To, With, By to organize the lesson so that students are given the appropriate supports to construct meaning and learn. In addition, the focus of the plan for 3c continues to be a focus for PD this year as we work to ensure all students are engaged and invited to take risks and that the pacing is adjusted to ensure that students own their learning versus being passive audience members. As a school, we uncovered and discussed the problem of practice as it relates to the pacing to reflect the priority of student engagement. This year's instructional focus builds on last year's focus to utilize high impact, research based graphic organizers (Marzano) to support access to higher level text across the grades and contents. This year, to increase the level of rigor, the school's instructional focus will utilize the high impact graphic organizers/thinking maps to ensure that writing is produced across content areas including the arts. Last year state test revealed that we made a 5.6 percent gain in ELA proficiency from 2016-17 to 2017-18 (from 13.2 % proficiency rate to 18.8% percent). We need to continue to focus on the state standards as our benchmarks and increase the opportunities for students to master them. - In terms of tracking student learning progress, we have the following: 1) a holistic school-wide data tracker that teachers use to monitor growth as measured by 4 benchmark F & P's, Writing Unit Tasks and baselines, and Math Unit Tests and baselines. 2. Grades 3-5 are utilizing the District-Shared School-wide Improvement Data Tracker and Assessments so that there is ongoing inquiry work to help guide instructional decisions and target differentiated student support by standards. 2. Strong Family Ties Parent Engagement and Community Relations to Support the Work of the School: This year we converted the main office space on the first floor into a bilingual Parent/Community Resource Center to demonstrate our commitment to further inviting parents and community members into our building for engaging them in productive work and support. Our new Parent Coordinator is working very closely with all school stakeholders to ensure that Parents have a welcoming, supportive and collaborative environment when they enter P.S. 212. To that end, we are planning more community events and Parent Workshops requested by Parents (based on need) to further build and strengthen our community ties. We address concerns that parents may have regarding their child daily to ensure everyone feels safe and heard. In addition, we provide resources and free uniforms to students in temporary housing to be aligned with the Mc Kimey Vento Act. To help achieve this, we are pleased to have received a technology grant from the Bronx Borough President for technology in the amount $500,000 to create a lab for the students and for parents who may not have access to technology at home. The new Community Director for the CBOs is also working closely with parents to offer their children after-school enrichment activities. Our plan is to incorporate a program called Read and Go, which invites dogs into the school, so students benefit from therapeutic effect while reading the them. We are also working on getting Senior citizens into the school to academically interact with students during reading and writing activities. We created a Wellness Committee to commit to our school's vision of educating the whole child on healthy choices in addition to the food bank program launched in 5 of our classrooms to expose students to whole foods and lessons on nutrition weekly. 3. Most Progress Supportive Environment: The school practices, which ensure that every student is given a voice aligned to the academic instructional focus of writing across content areas, include the school-wide Restorative Justice practices and training that we are doing this year. Each morning, teachers welcome students into morning restorative circles and discuss topics which are relevant 1  to the students lives. Students are then given the opportunity to draw and/or write how they feel. The 3 school-wide prompts include: "I am" "I feel" and "I want my day to be..." Each and every morning, as the students line up for the morning assembly, we recite the school morning affirmation: "I am amazing. I am so smart. I listen to my teachers. I show everyone respect. I try to be a good friend and to do the right thing, even when I think no one is watching. I am grateful for being here. I will give my best to make sure that today is a great day." This year, we have structured program to also include a weekly student advisory. The purpose of this forum is to provide a space to discuss school-wide concerns and utilize creative forms to express their journey as well as collaborate with CBOs such as Community Change to include cultural relevance in the programs and discussions being offered by guidance, admin, CBO Director, NYPD, etc. Key Areas of Focus for This Year 1. Rigorous Instruction: Our first area of focus this year is to improve ELA and Math curriculum and instruction, so that it is 1) Common Core-aligned and cohesive, 2) rigorous, engaging, and accessible, and 3) replete with accompanying formative assessments designed to monitor the nuances of student learning. Math Instruction is a school focus to address the state data results which show a decrease in proficiency of -4.6% and an increase in number of level ones of 19.9%. 2. Collaborative Teachers: Our second area of focus this year is teacher collaboration, so that teachers can 1) horizontally plan units and lesson together more effectively-especially with the input of special education and ENL teachers, 2) engage in inquiry to gauge student learning and teaching efficacy, and 3) to engage vertical planning, so that there is curricula cohesion from one grade to the next. 3. Supportive Environment: Our third area of focus this year is to ensure that we provide an even more supportive environment for ALL our students, so that we can provide 1) ongoing social-emotional support via a wide range of youth-development strategies and initiatives., and 2) ongoing academic enrichment for students who are struggling with reading, writing, and math. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X212 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 437 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 41 10 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 30 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 96.6% % Reduced Lunch 21.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 63.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.11 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 18.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 68% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 16 16 88.6% 1.4% 13.5% 34.6% 0.5% 0.9% 0 14% 7.3 10.9% 20% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Based on QR 2017-18 1.1/1.2/2.2 Some teachers attempted to incorporate TC ELA curriculum into their daily pedagogy. Some teachers engaged students in student-centered read alouds. In addition to common assessments such as the Fountas and Pinnell reading benchmarks, we have developed common rubrics to help establish clear writing benchmarks across grades. In math, we administer a common basic skills assessment to all students in grades K-5 with the goal of tracking their rate of progress in attaining fluency in basic operations and to implement early intervention for struggling students. Performance tasks in all disciplines are evaluated using a common rubric differentiated by task and aligned to grade-level standards to ensure the criteria upon which we are measuring student work is coherent and aligned to our school's mission. As a result, 60% of students made progress in one or more areas. Priority Needs Based on QR 2017-18 1.1/1.2/2.2 We will be working to ensure engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards Additional Finding Developing We will be working to ensure that teachers deliver learner-centered instruction, so that students have an opportunity to make their thinking visible via multi-sensory class participation and meaningful student work products. We will be working to align all assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the percentage of students performing at level-one in reading and math will decrease by 10% in grades three through five. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school opted into TC curricula for ELA and will utilize writing rubrics and checklists that are aligned to develop coherence in expectations for writing school-wide. Also they will use IREADY to supplement Reading Skill instruction. All Teachers Including Sped and ENL School Principal, Assistant Principals Select Teachers During the 2018-19 School-Year Common Planning Time All Students September K-5 Teachers 2018 For math, we will use Go Math supplemented with module and assessment materials from Engage, which is fundamentally aligned to the CCLS. Also, use of IREADY print and now online component to track progress and differentiate instruction based on student needs. This year we will implement a new Social Studies and Science curriculum aligned to the CCLS. Teacher teams will continue the process of developing instructional maps and making curricula adjustments to meet the needs of all learners including SWDs and ENLs. During the course of the school year the curriculum will demonstrate significant revisions or a comprehensive alignment to demonstrate that student data was strategically used to inform planning. In Reading, Writing, and Math, teachers will administer a common basic skills assessment to students in all grades from K-5 with the goal of tracking their rates of progress in attaining fluency in basic operations, and implementing early intervention for struggling students. During the Monday Professional Learning time, staff members will spend time interacting with the research-based text provided to them on High Impact Teaching Strategies (Thinking Maps) to impact student achievement., so that they can incorporate High Impact Teaching Strategies into their lessons and units of study to help students construct meaning. All Teachers Including Sped and ENL During the 2018-19 Professional Development Mondays Teachers will engage in inquiry-based structured professional collaborations for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, and the tracking of, and ownership of learning. Teacher Teams will administer and score common formative assessments throughout the year using a common rubric. Teachers will use this data to inform target groups and to revise All Teachers Including Sped and ENL All Teachers Including During the 2018-19 Tuesday Data Inquiry Time During 2018 19 School-Year School Principal, Assistant Principals, Select Teachers, Consultants, ULIT Coach, Instructional Technology Coach Teachers and Admin School Principal, 5  their practice and create additional scaffolds to support student learning for ENLs and SWDs and other high need subgroups. Sped and ENL Teachers Common Planning Time Assistant Principal, Teacher Teams, D12 NTC mentor Teacher teams will analyze student performance data to develop targeted instructional scaffolds, higher order questions, native language resources, visual aids, technology etc. to provide multiple entry points for all students including ENLs and SWDs. All Teachers Including Sped and ENL Teachers During 2018 19 School-Year Common Planning Time Teachers, Teacher Leaders and ULIT Coach Teachers, Instructional Technology Coach Academic Intervention Services (During the school day and after-school). Math/ELA blocks. Extended Day programs and Saturday School. Instructional Technology Coach (Educate) to infuse technology into daily instruction. LEAP- Performing Artists integrating Arts into Literacy Omni Learn- Creating hands on Science learning instruction Teachers, CBOs, Consultants ENL, Gr 3-5 During 2018 19 School-Year Common Planning Time 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To engage families and support their understanding of how to support children at home, parents will be invited to meet with teachers on Tuesdays during Parent Engagement and work individually with the teacher and their child. Teachers will host parent workshops presenting school curricula and materials. These meetings will be offered on an ongoing basis so that parents continue to have a forum to voice their concerns to the Principal. School Principal, ENL Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, NTC Mentor and Teachers will conduct parent workshops, hold parent conferences to facilitate understanding of academic expectations of the CCLS. The Parent Coordinator will send out a school messenger announcement informing parents of upcoming events. ENL Coordinator will hold Monthly Evening Workshops for Parents Oct-April. Teachers will use the 75 minute /Tuesday parental engagement time to schedule meeting with parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Common planning periods will be embedded in the school day schedule so that K-2 teachers can meet weekly with ULIT Coach and Gr 3-5 can meet with Instructional Technology Coach and Admin 2. Instructional Cabinet weekly with key school stakeholders 2. Monday professional development will serve to standardize and develop a common language for the work ahead. At various times, it may be differentiated to individualize pedagogical needs according to observation data. 3. Teachers will participate in inter-visitation cycles based on the Danielson Components they need support with. 4. Teachers will use a “Looking at student work protocol” to promote data analysis and "How do you know?" data collecting template. 5. Teachers will meet in grade teams/subject teams to facilitate vertical and horizontal alignment of curricula. 6. Teachers will conduct ongoing analysis/grading of interim assessments/MOSL/ common assessment during Tuesday PM Data time. 7. Model Teachers will turn-key collaborative inquiry results by facilitating professional development sessions, and participate in inter-team visitations to share best practices. 8. BFSC 9. Teachers will be offered per session to teach in after school program targeting ELLs and Grades 3-5 Academic Support. 10. New teachers will be partnered with a mentor from the New Teacher Center who will use 60-90 minutes of sanctioned time to observe and meet with beginning teachers to support their planning and impact on student learning. 11. Teachers will utilize resources purchased: Guided Reading Book room, Fundations, Ready Print, and IREADY online component. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By October 2018, all teachers will be actively engaged in weekly common planning meetings. 2. By October 2018, targeted teachers (Gr 3-5) will demonstrate improved use of data (School Improvement Data Tracker) to develop scaffolds for struggling learners, implement lessons with fidelity, and would have participated in one cycle of the collaborative inquiry process. 7  3. By February 2019, parents would have been invited to a minimum of three events with evidence of increase attendance overall, i.e. celebration, workshop, or parent/teacher conferences. 4. By February 2019, School Principal and School Programmer will have embedded Common Planning Time, Teacher Team/Inquiry Team and Interdisciplinary Team times within the school program. 5. By February 2019, the Principal and the Professional Learning Committee will have evaluated the Professional Development Learning Plan in lieu of ADVANCE data to ensure alignment with identified areas in need of improvement. 6. By February 2019, Principal and teacher teams will have monitored student progress on curricula aligned periodic assessments as well as collected and assess teacher team data by grade, subject, and departments for the first quarter. 7. By February 2019, Administrative staff will have developed a correlating action plan that was turn keyed to the entire teaching staff. 8. By March 2019, Administrative staff will have conducted at least four informal observations of teacher practice and provided specific actionable feedback within fifteen days. 9. By February 2019, curriculum departments, teacher teams, coaches and assistant Principals will have evidence of having developed/modified two cycles of their instructional maps to maintain an authentic pacing calendar. 10. By February, 2019 the on-site D12 NTC mentor will support new and identified teachers in implementing best practices by providing ongoing support via coaching, feedback, and instructional support both in and outside of the classroom. 11. Every month, the Principal and Assistant Principal and the NTC Mentors will meet to calibrate and norm on expectations for instruction and learning resulting in the creation of action plans to meet instructional goals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teachers will review formative, summative, and interim assessment data, including item analyses, to monitor student progress towards goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths Based on the 2018-2019 Learning Environment Survey: To maintain an environment that is safe and conducive to learning, we implement Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS), via a school-wide program where every stakeholder is expected to demonstrate SHINE. The School Learning Community has found this school wide program has had a profound effect on school culture. As a result of instituting rewards for positive behavior and hosting monthly assemblies where to publicly acknowledge outstanding members of the school community, the climate and tone of the building is slowly, but steadily being transformed. . Every month, the PBIS team and PTA host an assembly and invite families to acknowledge students who achieve 100% attendance, student of the month, and earn the required number of SHINE points for school sponsored trips and rewards. Priority Needs: To ensure that students grow socially and emotionally, so that they have high self-esteem and confidence, our priority need is to implement unified youth-development practices throughout the school. Policies, Practices, and Structures: The school will evolve its year-old SHINE program, which establishes clear expectations for academic and personal behaviors for all students via weekly advisory sessions with guidance, Keynote speakers, NYPD, Admin. The school-wide SHINE core values will illuminate students who are meeting expectations, while the school will strategically target individual and groups of students who are not meeting expectations with support from guidance and her at-risk program. We will also have Restorative Practice, Advisories and student self-reflective writing, which will help create a clear link between students’ social and emotional development and success in reaching school-level student achievement and improvement goals. To ensure that these practices are brought to fruition, we will provide ongoing professional development for teachers to help equip them with the strategies needed to identify and respond appropriately when a student displays signs of social emotional distress that may impede academic success. Other professional development topics will include all aspects of Restorative Practice and running effective student advisories. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the 9  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will implement restorative practices to strengthen the social emotional development of our students, result in a 50% reduction of Principal Suspensions as evidenced in OORS data from 2018-19. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers and staff will receive training on how to use restorative circles and other strategies to respond appropriately to students with social-emotional problems using the crisis de-escalation protocol with a focus on incorporating strategies from the Behavioral Intervention Manual along with restorative justice circles. All school staff During the 2018-2019 School Year Professional Development Mondays School leaders, in collaboration with the guidance counselor, parent coordinator and teachers, will develop a 5th-grade advisory program that will use a research based curriculum to increase personal behaviors that promote academic achievement, social-emotional health, and teach college and career readiness skills. Students in grade- 5 During the 2018-2019 School Year Every month, the PBIS team and PTA will host an assembly and invite families to acknowledge students who achieve 100% attendance, student of the month, and earn the required number of SHINE points for school sponsored trips and rewards. Parents, Students, Teachers During the 2018-2019 School Year - Monthly In September 2018, and ongoing throughout the school year, school leaders will launch the PBIS team to collect, compare, and analyze quantitative (Report Cards/Attendance/) and qualitative data (PBIS tracking sheets/incident reports) to identify patterns and trends, share best practices observed across the school community, monitor student progress and the programs impact on the community. Parents, Students, Teachers During the 2018-2019 School Year - Monthly School Principal, Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselor, Consultants, the school’s professional development committee (Instructional Cabinet) School leaders, including the Guidance Counselor, and Advisory teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, PBIS team, PTA President, Instructional Cabinet, and Parent Coordinator Principal, Assistant Principal, PBIS team, Dean, PTA president, Data Specialist and Parent Coordinator, Family Worker, will collaborate to advertise, plan, and execute monthly assembly. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 1  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent's will be invited to orientations and assemblies to learn about our school environment supports. They will also be invited to PPT meetings and teacher led workshops to address specific challenges facing their child. During the school year, the school will send home letters to families regarding the Chancellor's Discipline Code and the PBIS program, guidance, and supports in place to maintain a positive culture. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Monthly Ceremony for SHINE ceremonies. 2. Per-session for teachers to teach after school tutoring and recreational programs. 3. Advisory teaches into preventative measures for school issues. 5. Embed advisory periods in the day schedule. 6. Behavioral Intervention Manual Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By February 2019, School leaders, including the Principal, Assistant Principals, School Leadership Team, and teachers will have evaluated first quarter PBIS data to identify patterns and trends and developed a solid tiered intervention plan) 2. By February 2019, the Principal, Assistant Principal and Parent Coordinator will have monitored parent attendance via sign off sheets at each event/activity and report a 5% increase in involvement per activity. 3. By February 2019, the Principal and Assistant Principal will have evaluated and monitored first quarter OORs reports for incidents and suspensions monthly, identified targeted students, and implemented a tiered intervention plan as evidenced by a log of assistance. 4. By February 2019, the Assistant Principal will have collected completed the anti-bullying and cyber-bullying training of all students as part of the Advisory program. 5. By February 2019, Principal, Assistant Principal, Consultants, and Guidance Counselor will have engaged in at least one cycle of analysis of the impact of the implementation of strategies from the Behavioral Intervention Manual on the progress of targeted students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2  Administration will monitor OORs reports quarterly to measure the impact of interventions and supports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths As Per the 2018-2019 Quality Review Structures, such as common planning time, have been created for teachers to meet regularly to plan and evaluate curriculum, as well as to examine student work. Priority Needs - QR Indicators 2.2, 4.2: Although team meetings support the developing teacher practice aligned to the school's instructional focus, the use of formative assessment data and student work needs to be evident across all subject areas and grades. Inquiry teams must measure and monitor goals and next instructional steps. Teachers need ongoing professional development in all aspects of how to engage in effective collaborative curriculum planning (including effective differentiated curriculum planning), effective assessment creation, and effective ways of engaging in inquiry to inform instructional next steps. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will analyze student work to capture trends and develop next-steps to revise instructional practice in grades 3 to 5, which will result in a 4% increase (from 10.9% to 14.9%) in the number of students receiving a level 3 or 4 and a decrease of 10% ( 68.2% to 58.2%) in students scoring a level 1 on the NYS Math Exams. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will receive Professional Development on all aspects of how to engage in effective collaborative planning and inquiry. Collaborative teacher groups will receive informal observations in order for school leaders to measure the efficacy of collaborative practice. Observations will be followed by whole-group debriefing accompanied by actionable feedback for next steps. Teachers Teachers will participate in unit and lesson planning clinics to ensure that levels of rigor and questioning are deepened (DOK, Cognitive Rigor Matrix, Danielson). Teachers, Para professionals Teachers will examine student work products (data analysis; quantitative and qualitative) to adjust lesson plans, units of student, and design standards based assessments that target identified gaps in what students know and are able to do. Teachers Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers During the School Principal, Assistant Principal, Teachers and Talent Coach Principal and Assistant Principals Administrators and Lead teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher Leaders, Coaches, and School Programmer 2018-19 School Year Professional Development Mondays During the 2018-2019 School Year -Monthly During the 2018-2019 School Year - Periodically During the 2018-2019 School Year - On a Quarterly Basis during Weekly Teacher Team Meetings 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations in order to support their children at home, teachers in K-5 will remain in the cafeteria on Tuesdays to greet and chat with parents to build relationships and invites conversations about their child's progress. 5  Parents will be invited to meet with teacher teams from their child's grade bands on Tuesdays. Formal meetings that will encompass a school walk through will occur four times during the school year during the DOE scheduled parent/teacher conference days. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The funding will be used to pay per session and support the various professional development offerings - on site and offered externally. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1 By February 2019, every teachers will have received at least 4 hours of Professional Development on the Danielson Framework for Teaching which included practical strategies for addressing the needs of ENLs and SWDs. 2 By March 2019, all teachers will have engaged in a least four observation and feedback cycles. 3 By February 2019, all staff will have participated in at least one lesson planning clinics to ensure the level of rigor and questioning is deepened (DOK, Cognitive Rigor Matrix, Danielson). 4 On a quarterly basis and during weekly teacher team meetings, Principal, Assistant principal, and teachers, will look at student work products (data analysis; quantitatively and qualitatively) to adjust lesson plans, units of student, and design standards based assessments that target identified gaps in what students know and are able to do. 5 By January 2019, every teacher will have conducted at least two intra-visitations using a focus from the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 6. By February 2019, at least 30% of Teachers will have participated in inter-visitations amongst other schools to build partnerships and share best practices. 7. By February 2019, Principal and Assistant Principal have observed two interactions between menteee and mentor. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrators will utilize the ADVANCE data dashboard to monitor patterns and trends in teacher performance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Based on 2017-18 QR Indicators 1.3/3.1/4.1 and School Quality Guide Framework Elements 2017-18 It was noted that we make strategic organizational decisions to support the school’s instructional goals and meet student learning needs, as evidenced by meaningful student work products. It was noted that we establish a coherent vision of school improvement that is reflected in a short list of focused, data-based goals that are tracked for progress and are understood and supported by the entire school community. It was noted that we observe teachers using the Danielson Framework for Teaching along with the analysis of learning outcomes to elevate school-wide instructional practices and implement strategies that promote professional growth and reflection. Priorities Based on 2017-18 QR Indicators 3.1/4/1: With the addition of new school staff and with the truncation of the middle school, the Principal needs to ensure that ALL school stakeholders establish and share a coherent vision of our school improvement needs. The Principal needs to continue to embed the components of the Danielson Framework throughout all school practice with both Assistant Principals and all teachers in order to improve instructional efficacy in literacy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have engaged in targeted professional development designed to advance student learning and received observation feedback resulting in an improved average rating of 2.5 up from 2.15 in Danielson component 3c. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Principal will improve the communication systems within the school and the community, so all stakeholders are aware of the school 's shared vision, goals, progress towards those goals, and where their assistance would be most helpful so that there will be a 10% increase in passing ELA and Math Standardized Assessments for April. The Principal will lead teachers in ongoing Professional Development on incorporating Research Based High Impact Teaching Strategies into lessons. Teachers will advance student learning by providing students with the strategies they need to access higher level text. The Principal will assist teacher teams in administering the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment and NYS aligned Reading and Writing Baseline Assessments, and a Math Basic Skill Assessment to students in grades K-5 to surface gaps, establish benchmarks, and inform instruction. (Strategies to address ENL, SWDs and High Need students will include the use of non-linguistic representations by Marzano, which is one of the 'High Impact Teaching Strategies' a toolkit of research based strategies that has been shared with all teachers to support their instruction in an ongoing way and to ensure access by all learners.) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students, Staff, Families, CBOs Throughout the 2018-2019 School Year Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator All Teachers September Principal Students in grades K-5 2018-February 2019 October- November 2018, February-March 2019, and May-June 2019 Principal and Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Principal's goal is to increase Parent Engagement during the 2018-2019 school year by ensuring that parents will receive a monthly newsletter from the parent coordinator that invites them to engage in activities, share relevant information, and to promote student learning. The PTA President will organize parents to support school initiatives through various volunteer efforts and support parents in matching families with support resources. Guidance Counselor will host parent workshops to help support parents struggling with behavior management by providing strategies for conflict resolution. Teachers will prepare Math/ELA workshops and provide the information needed to best support families in the area of academic achievement. The administration will host a monthly forum for parents to share ideas on how to build on the school's current best practices. The progress toward meeting the goal will be measured by the growth in number of active participants as reflected in the sign in logs kept by the parent 8  coordinator throughout the year. In addition, the parent coordinator will survey parent in the beginning of the year and at the end of the year and measure the results against each other. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Teachers will use Mac Computers in the school library to conduct whole class testing. 3. Teachers will utilize common planning time embedded in the program to analyze scope and sequence alignment with curricula aligned benchmark assessments. 4. Teachers will be offered per-session to participate in the collaborative inquiry process to analyze student performance results. 5. Teachers will be offered per-session to conduct analysis/scoring of periodic assessments. 6. Fountas and Pinnell Assessment material. 7. Basic skill workbooks. 8. Administration Per-Session for supervision of before/after school activities. 9. Purchase a class set of laptops for classroom based testing. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. By November 2018, Teacher teams will analyze student performance on baseline assessments and utilize the data to drive instruction in the classroom, identify students requiring tier II/tier III interventions, and to identify gaps/make adjustments in curriculum. 2. By February 2019, teacher teams will administer Fall Interim Assessments and establish goals in preparation for State Standardized Tests. 3. On a quarterly basis, Principal and teacher teams will monitor student progress on curricula aligned periodic assessments as well as collect and assess teacher team data by grade and subject. By February 2019, 30% of teachers will have participated in at least one cycle of collaborative inquiry process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers and administrators will use the LASW protocol to create action plans and the Assessment Analysis toolkit from "Driven by Data" to assess the plans impact on student learning outcomes. 9  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Based On 2017-18 School Quality Snapshot: The set-aside time for teachers to engage parents on Tuesdays has already had a positive impact on the quantity and quality of access to parents. This year, on Tuesdays for parent engagement, teachers, parent coordinator and PTA will conduct various workshops that cater to the student and parents’ needs. (ex. How to help students study?) The school utilizes school messenger to invite parents to attend monthly assemblies, provide timely updates on upcoming events and initiatives. The Multicultural Magnet School has an active Parent Association that works with our Parent Coordinator to communicate with Parents about various events, including student celebrations, school performances, monthly workshop. In addition, parents volunteer in the school every day assisting with arrival and dismissal procedures which has helped to promote belonging and trust through their frequent engagement with members and other parents in the school community. Priority Need Based on the On 2017-18 School Quality Snapshot: The school must expand the use of communication mechanisms to develop a system where parents can participate in reciprocal communications with teachers and other staff members about their child’s academic and social emotional developmental health and progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will host a minimum of 6 parent workshops, 4 Principal Meet & Greets, 1 Family Night Art Exhibition, and 1 Family Night Musical Concert in order to promote Family and Community ties. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  The school will provide parent workshops targeting the following school wide initiatives: cyber bullying, attendance, and 'Who Is 212?' Parents and Guardians Throughout the 2018-19 School-Year The school will conduct staff and parent trainings on the use of an electronic grade book, as well as provide letters to parents explaining the rationale behind the program. Parent, Teachers The school will partner with 'Go Pass" which is a NYC Volunteer service that handles fingerprinting and background checks for those parents who are eligible to work in the school building. Parents (met) The school will provide The PS 212 Evening Academy for the parents of ENLs. The workshops will introduce parents to technology and increase their understanding of ELL instruction and assessment. Twenty Parents of English Language Learners. Fall 2018 Throughout the 2018-2019 School Year Teachers and Parents will meet once a month on Thursday evenings for eight sessions during the months of February-May. School Leaders, Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator Assistant Principals and Parent Coordinator. Principal, Assistant Principal, PTA and SLT in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator The ENL Coordinator and Teachers in collaboration with school administration will Oversee the following four targeted sessions: ● Orientation to the Title III After School Program ● Understanding the NYSESLAT ● Literacy for ELA Introduction to technology and computers 2  Every month, parents/families will receive a school newsletter and an invitation to attend a school event e.g. workshop, celebration, school performance Parents/Families Every month, parents will receive an invitation to attend a school based event. School leaders-Principal, Assistant Principal, PTA and SLT in collaboration with the Parent Coordinator will use school messenger, back pack, flyers, text, and emails to extend an invitation to all parents to encourage participation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The after-school program Phipps, works closely with students from grades 2-5 and their families to support students in reaching their full potentials as they work to incorporate and build on the academic skills taught during the day and apply this to the creative arts worked on during the after-school program. This year, Community Change the program's theme is Culture exploration within our community. There will be culminating productions in which the community is invited to celebrate the student culture and diversity. We also are partnering with Food Bank to launch Cookshop in our school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Per-session for staff to teach PS 212 Evening Academy for the parents of ELLs 2. Per-session for Teacher led professional develop/workshops before/after school. 3. Instructional materials for ELL academy (workbooks, trade books. 4. Copy paper. 5. Volunteers for morning arrival. 6. Per-session for ELA, Math after school for ENLs. 7. Funds for Breakfast with Principal 8. Plan 4 Parent Teacher Conferences/Open houses September, November, January, March, 9. Educational software that targets the development of language and academic vocabulary e.g. Reading Eggs, and Study Island Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 3  Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1.. By February 2019, School Administrators will have analyzed parent attendance at school events and developed a plan to increase participation. (met) 2. By February 2019, parents will have received an invitation to a school based event, conference, or celebration at least one time per month. (met) 3. By February 2019, Teachers will work in grade bands to develop and implement a training and professional development plan. (met Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Progress Reports, Report Cards, Student Work, Inquiry Team Data, guidance Counselor Referral, Parent Request, CST referrals Progress Reports, Report Cards, Student Work, Inquiry Team Data, guidance Counselor Referral, Parent Request, CST referrals Progress Reports, Report Cards, Student Work, Inquiry Team Data, guidance Counselor Referral, Parent Request, CST referrals. Progress Reports, Report Cards, Student Work, Inquiry Team Data, guidance Counselor Referral, Parent Request, CST referrals Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Individualized RTI support, Words their way, Differentiated instructional resources, Wilson, Reading Eggs, Study Island,, Live Streaming, Brain Pop, i-read Ready, Basic Skills, RTI for All, Study Island Small group, tutoring, one to one During the school day, before/after school Small group, tutoring, one to one During the school day, before/after school Science fair, Science study hall,Study Island Small group, tutoring, one to one During the school day, before/after school Study Island Small group, tutoring, one to one During the school day, before/after school 5 Small group, tutoring, one to one Small group, tutoring, one to one During the school day, before/after school At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) At-risk counseling, Response to Intervention, Positive Behavior Incentive Support Program, Student Incentive Programs , CST team, PPT (Attendance team), At risk counseling (Counselors and or SAPIS), RTI, PIP plans, functional behavioral counseling, academic counseling, Community Outreach (AIDP), MDR, 504 Accommodation for At-Risk immunization, triage as needed, referrals, and wellness consultations 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 45 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School uniforms and materials; at risk guidance supports for students and their families. Family worker assistance to access community services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  n/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 1. Principal has partnered with the New Teacher Center to provide mentoring for teachers in the profession for 1-3 years. NTC is a national non-profit organization that builds districts' capacity to transform the professional growth trajectory of new teachers. As a result, we expect to see remarkably effective new teachers, increased overall teacher retention, and improved student achievement. 2. Buddy teachers and special emphasis on classroom intra-visitations 3. A program schedule that builds common planning time, departmental conferences, and grade conferences 4. Use of Engage NY to promote online teacher professional development 5. Special emphasis on the Depth of Knowledge Wheel and the Cognitive Rigor Matrix to promote rigor and higher order thinking tasks/questions in addition to Charolette Danielson Rubric. 6. Provide ongoing Professional Development for teachers and staff to ensure effective use of strategies, rubrics, curriculum maps, unit planning and data analysis 7. Partner with District office to provide lesson plan clinics, Instructional Rounds and classroom visits 8. Partner with the Teacher Effectiveness Unit with emphasis on the Danielson Teaching Framework 9. Monthly staff meetings to address teaching practices and data awareness 10. Attend teacher fairs to recruit highly qualified teachers or other pedagogues 11. Network with other Principals and Assistant Principals with the focus of recruiting teachers or staff members 12. “Webinars and tutorial resources based on Engage NY 9  13. Partner with BFSC to further individual teachers' education in his/her content area and enhance their teaching skills. 14. Administration will create a hiring cabinet to attend hiring fairs to attain highly qualified teachers. 15. Administration will partner with local colleges and the NYC teaching fellows to attract highly qualified candidates. 16. Principal will post vacancies in the new teacher finder to identify pre qualified teaching candidates 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● ELI workshops for Assistant Principals ● Instructional Rounds ● CBO led professional learning sessions ● Principal led Professional Development for Assistant Principal and Teachers using professional learning handbook ● Teacher led Professional Developments * Administrations, mentors and mentee will partner with NTC and the use of the website"Learning Zone" Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 0  Pre-school students at PS 212 are an integral part of the community. Students receive early intervention services from the school based support team and early childhood teachers participate in all professional development sessions held at the school. The curriculum is aligned to support long term goals and develop targeted interventions to ensure that students are on track to access the Kindergarten curriculum. Parents of early childhood students are included in the distribution lists for all communication systems, and are invited to participate in all school based activities. The School is supported by a DECE social worker visit, two times a month. During these visits, the social worker conducts need assessments and provides families with resources to enable them to access supports both within and outside of the school community. An instructional coordinator from the NYC DECE also collaborates with the social worker to educate families via workshop on the best practices to ensure a successful transition to kindergarten. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Default on Measures of Student Learning. MOSL committee selected to select local MOSL assessments, target population, and measure. Teachers received professional development resources from the Principal on using the rubrics for NYC performance assessments and professional development on how to use data from these assessments is forthcoming from the MOSL coach assigned to the District. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 528,349.00 67,287.00 12,708.00 0 2,591,143.00 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 5A 5A 5E 5A,5B,5C,5D 1  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Multicultural Magnet School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Multicultural Magnet School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 4  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 5  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. The Multicultural magnet School School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Multicultural Magnet School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 6  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  communicating with families through class dojo; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 7  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year;  assist with utilizing class dojo Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● Communicate the weekly communication structure in place designed for parents to meet with their child's teacher. ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 8  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 9  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● Always try my best to learn;  Come to school prepared with all materials and ready to learn;  Always wear the school uniform;  Check class dojo for teacher communication 0  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CBO Community Change is going to be working on culture and diversity within the school. There will be an after-school component that focuses on the culture of the students and the community and bringing that into the school to celebrate the diveristy. Still in planning meetings with all CBOS (tbd) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of students will have engaged in ongoing culturally relevant curriculum as evidenced by culminating multi-cultural event(s) at the school. Still in planning meetings with all CBOS (tbd) Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? If students are engaged in ongoing culturally relevant activities they will feel welcomed and celebrated for their differences, and take more academic risks in an environment that they feel appreciated in. Therefore, the academic goals require ongoing efforts and confidence in who they are and in their skill sets. Still in planning meetings with all CBOS (tbd) Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Community Change Omni Learn Sobro na Target Population Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal tbd tbd tbd na tbd tbd tbd na tbd tbd tbd na Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment 1  Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will have 4 leads from Phipps, 2 student advocates that will work on the Math and ELA fluency in addition to homework support and the creative arts daily afterschool. Still in planning meetings with all CBOS (tbd) Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Still in planning meetings with all CBOS (tbd) Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Still in planning meetings with all CBOS (tbd) 2  Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Still in planning meetings with all CBOS (tbd) Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Still in planning meetings with all CBOS (tbd) Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: RATIONALE: To ensure that our immigrants/ELLs students can both improve their English language proficiency, fluency, and meet the academic standards in the content areas, we will implement a comprehensive academic program that considers the specific needs of the students. Therefore, teachers will differentiate instruction, use student-centered activities, and instructional strategies that improve understanding and enhance positive achievement outcomes. Emphasis will be placed on helping with the development of critical reading and math skills, additional instructional time dedicated to content specific vocabulary, reading comprehension, and listening comprehension. Teachers will also consistently assess student understanding and re-teach if necessary. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: Our academic program will provide services to approximately 40 students from all levels, entering to expanding and in grades 2 to 5. These students are: Newcomers (ELLs who have been in our school one year or less) Developing ELLs (Students who have received ELL services for 4 to 6 years) ELL Students with Disabilities (ELLs served by an Individualized Education Plan) Students who have not been identified as SIFE, but who are two or more years below grade level in literacy and math. Schedule and duration: Program will run on Wednesdays and Thursday, from November 1, 2018 to March 28, 2019. Language of instruction: English Number and types of certified teachers: There are two teachers certified on teaching English to speakers of other languages (TESOL) Types of materials: "Language Power" curricula and/or supplemental teacher reference materials for teaching English as a second language. Supplies such as chart paper, markers, pens, binders, folders, supplemental reading texts for classroom language enhancement, assessment testing materials: 'Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT' from Attanasio and Associates, and teacher-made assessments from educational resources/websites aligned to NYSESLAT. 5  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: RATIONALE: According to the revised New York State Every Student Succeeds Act Plan, "New York State's end goal is that 95% of ELLs/MLLs make progress toward acquisition of English proficiency". To enhance positive achievement outcomes, it is essential that ongoing support and research-based professional development for teachers is provided. It is well known that the more the teachers know about the development of early literacy, oral language, students' home language, and their cultural background, the better knowledgeable they will be in designing appropriate lessons and scaffolds for their students. Therefore, Our ENL teachers must continuously acquire new information regarding best practices in the field. General education teachers are also required to participate in professional development focused on meeting the students’ needs, for the purpose of facilitating the student's achievement of English proficiency and the academic standards. TEACHERS TO RECEIVE TRAINING - Content area and ENL teachers in grades K-5 SCHEDULE AND DURATION - Training will be all year long (September to June) Dates of service will be provided based on mutual availability. Both in house and outside Professional Development will be provided. TOPICS TO BE COVERED - Topics include, but are not limited to, *Data Dive-Analyzing student work samples, and creating instructional supports to meet the needs of students *Enhancing Classroom Learning Environments for ELLs - revamping writing centers to better support immigrant/ ELL students learning (listening, speaking, reading, and writing), *Creating Highly Interactive Classrooms- utilizing cooperative learning, peer tutoring, and flexible grouping, ENL scaffolding strategies *Embedding Cultural Relevance and Inclusion- designing units of study with a plan for diversity and inclusion with cultural relevance *Using What Works/Research Based Strategies- Successful Non-linguistic Strategies for the Content Classroom *Literacy Development in the Early Years- Language and Content Instruction, Vocabulary Development and Academic Language *Testing and Assessment Cycles- Determine areas of strength and weakness to provide the students the skills they need to be able to successfully obtain proficiency in English NAME OF PROVIDER - The Center for Educational Innovation, Bronx Field Support Center, ULIT Coach (K-2), Instructional Technology Coach from Educate (3-5) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration  topics to be covered 6  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: RATIONALE: In order for immigrant/ELL students to succeed, parents must be active participants in their child's education. Therefore, part of the funding provided by the Title III Immigrant allocation, will be utilized to promote parental engagement activities that support the needs of parents of immigrant students. SCHEDULE AND DURATION: Dates of service will be provided based on mutual availability, on Tuesdays, during parents engagement time, Morning Workshops with the Parent Coordinator and ELL Providers, and on Saturdays, from October to June. TOPICS TO BE COVERED: Suggested topics include, but are not limited to the following: *Reading and writing activities that can support their child's educational progress at home *Interactive learning activities that promote competency in all academic areas *Information regarding the "Every Student Succeeds Act"' *Support in interpreting tests and other data such as report cards, attendance information and school information. *School and Community Resources-Information regarding community services provided by Community based organizations, mental health providers, hospitals, clinics, and social service agencies will be part of the overall plan. In addition, Mr. Cardoza/Ms. Rodriguez Parent Coordinator, and the Language Proficiency Team, conduct interim need assessments (surveys) to determine the needs of the parents. *Various Evening/Saturday Academy for the Parents of Immigrants/Ells to assist them in Technology and translation services. *Cultural trips for our parents and students NAME OF PROVIDER: The Center for Educational Innovation, CBO Phipps, Parent Coordinator, Family Worker, ELL Providers, Guidance Counselor, Administration, Montifiore Clinic HOW PARENTS WILL BE NOTIFIED OF THESE ACTIVITIES: Parents will be notified using the autodialing system, emails, text messages, letters, school messenger, and personalized phone calls. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 12 School Name The Multicultural Magnet School School Number 212 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Gloria Ford Anderson Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Claudio Estrella/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Belkis Pena Weeks /ESL Related-Service Provider Claudia Perry Superintendent Rafaela Espinal Assistant Principal Coach School Counselor Mimy Mpowa Parent type here Parent Coordinator Orlando Cardoza Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 417 9 Total number of ELLs 108 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 25.90%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 4 2 O Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Early literacy skills are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell. Fountas and Pinnell allows us to assess reading levels, fluency, comprehension, phonetic skills, and writing skills. The data has allowed us to pinpoint the need to focus instruction on reading strategies for comprehension and phonics for decoding . Fountas and Pinnell Running Record is utilized school wide. Each student's reading level is assessed thorugh their decoding, fluency, and comprehension of the text. The Fountas and Pinnell data for Kindergarten and first grade demonstrated the need to focus on sight words and phonetic structures such as digraphs, dipthongs, and blends . Our ELLS in first grade cannot decode digraphs and blends as one phonetic structure . Additionally, our beginner second grade ELLS are struggling with letter recognition, decoding simple consonant vowel consonant patterns. For these reasons ESL instruction will focus on family words, short vowels cvc patterns, utilizing visual cues, and decoding strategies. Furthermore students below the grade level benchmarks in Fountas and Pinnel will be grouped for RTI instruction. 0  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support this effort, ESL teachers complete the running records for students in ELA and where resources provide a running record with an assessment for comprehension in their home language to further identify any learning disabilities. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Through quantitative measures such as the AMAO tool, AYP, NYSESLAT, benchmarks which are house assessments and the ELL periodic Assessment data is analyzed by teachers, teacher teams, inquiry and administration to pinpoint if the ELLS demonstrate progress in acquiring academic English necessary to perform on grade level . Qualitative measures such as student portfolios, Common Core performance tasks, and teacher feedback, allow teachers and administration to pinpoint the achievement gaps in the core instruction of ELLS. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, ESL teachers create instructional maps and pacing guides that blend content area objectives in ELA and Language objectives to support ENL student access to the curricula via building skills/knowledge such as academic vocabulary for ELA units of study and aligning language objectives to facilitate coherence in learning across subject areas. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All students, including ELLS, are given baseline assessements that align with the grade level benchmarks and competencies students should attain by their grade. Teachers utilize the data from the baseline assessments in team meetings to discuss and designed tailored instruction. Tailored instruction of students at-risk , or below grade level benchmarks is given in small groups or 1:1 during RTI., and ESL (push in/pull out). Additional assessments , midlines, and in house teacher created assessments allow student progress to continually be monitored and instructional decisions are revisited. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. A historical and current review of the NYSITELL AND NYSESLAT results revealed that 13 students in grades K-8 scored at Proficient/Commanding; 19 scored at beginning/Entering; 18 scored at Emerging/Low intermediate/ 27 scored at Traisitioning/High Intermediate; 31 scored at Advanced/ Expanding. 13 scored at Commanding/Proficient. Our newcomer students are testing at 18 Entering/Beginning; 9 Emerging/Low Intermediate; 14 Transitioning/High Intermediate; 21 Expanding/Advanced. A review of current NYSESLAT data (2016) revealed that although some students achieved a particular level (ex.. Advanced) on the combined modality report, their actual achievement differed. Our findings about ENL student proficiency in the different modalities has remained consistent over the past years. In some instances, a student who scored at the advanced level in speaking and listening, may actually be at beginning level in speaking and intermediate level in writing. In addition, our largest placement group in Listening/Speaking (34) is Advanced and Reading/Writing (28) Advanced . The data also revealed scattering within modalities tend to occur (in this case) among the upper grades (7th and 8th) which was our largest influx of ELLS in 2015-2016. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the school year the Principal distributes student performance levels to teachers in all grades and subject areas. Throughout the school year, the ENL teachers monitor ENL student progress towards goals and indicate their progress on report cards every quarter. Additionally, the ESL teachers complete data sheets every six weeks of student achievement in ESL. This information is shared with grade level teachers Part IV: ELL Programming 1  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In an effort to customize our instructional program, the variation in the required instructional units per level of functioning is addressed during our programming sessions in a freestanding ESL stand alone model. Students are placed heterogeneously in their corresponding grade bands. Beginner/Entering and Low intermediate/Emerging level students receive 8 periods (360 min) with 180 minutes in an intergrated ELA classroom as per CR part 154. Intermediate/Transitioning, Advanced group, receive 4 periods per week (180 min). Proficient/Commanding students receive 90 minutes. In our current scheduling, Beginners , Intermediates and Advanced/Expanding receive push in ESL instruction for 4-6 periods a week and ESL pull out for the remaining mandated periods separately according to placement. Additionally, lower level Intermediates are pulled out with Beginners at selected periods. Higher level intermediates are pulled out with Advanced students at selected periods. Push-In instruction is also scheduled per class. The mandated 45 minutes of Support for ENLs is given with an additional certified ESL teacher providing push-in support. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our beginners/entering and low intermediate/emerging students receive 8 periods (360 min) of ESL instruction, 4-6 periods of ESL push in to ELA and content area classes and ESL pull out for the remaining mandated periods separately according to placement. Intermediate/Transitioning, Advanced group, receive 4 periods per week (180 min) 2 are push in to ELA classes. Proficient/Commanding students receive 90 minutes both receive push in to ELA. Additionally, low Intermediates/Emerging are pulled out with Beginner/Entering at selected periods. Intermediate/Transitioning are pulled out with Advanced/Expanding students at selected periods. Push-In instruction is also scheduled per class. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are delivered using sheltered English instruction and a variety of constant scaffolding in order to allow ELLS to acquire content area vocabulary in English and content area skills in English. Through constant modeling of academic language in Socratic seminars , cooperative groups, and through accountable talk students are expected to respond and participate using academic language and higher order thinking. Teachers are encouraged to create cooperative learning groups in order to facilitate opportunities for students to interact with students at their proficiency level and students at a higher proficiency level. Through thematic units teachers model language functions and structures using academic language in context. Instruction is aligned with mandated ESL/ELA, content area standards, and the core curriculum. Teachers are encouraged to create thematic units which incorporate content and language objectives. Quality materials reflect the home language of the student and are aligned with the school's core curriculum. Texts are available in the home language of many of our students in the content areas. Our Go Math teacher and student materials are utilized in English and Spanish. Additionally our ELA curricula has embedded support for the instruction of ELLs. The ESL Teachers meets on a weekly basis with content area teachers and the ESL teachers through mentoring, professional development and department meetings to discuss current units, differentiation, and collaboration of the ESL teachers with the content area teachers. Additionally, the ESL teachers plan lessons in collaboration with content area teachers to provide constant support with a focus on academic 2  language, differentiation, cognitive demands of tasks, evaluating student work and data, and scaffolding in the content areas to meet student needs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Ongoing daily assessments, thematic assessments,demonstrations, exhibits, and skill based assessments in verbal and written form in ESL and in the content areas are created through the collaboration of ESL teachers and content area teachers. A student portfolio is maintained by classroom teachers in order to be assessed periodically by teachers, students and parents. Students are encouraged to put pieces in their portfolio reflecting their home language and English. The students are given formal and informal assessments in the native language of the ELLS when necessary. In addition, assessments in the native language of the ELLS are present in our current curriculum materials. Ongoing assessments are utilized to evaluate student learning and performance. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our SIFE students receive additional small group tutoring . They are involved in our RTI Initiatives. Our Basic Skills RTI program Initiative consists of educators, that are also translators, which instruct the children two days a week using English and their native language. Their instruction is in all the content areas allowing the students to acquire skills in their native language and in English. Our SIFE students are also involved in Saturday, Holiday and After School programs. Because of their special condition they also receive counseling services and specialized instructional materials. Former ELLS participate in our afterschool program by invitation. This allows for academic and socio-emotional support of Former ELLS. Former ELLS are scheduled for testing accomodations each ENL student receives up to two years of ESL services after testing at proficiency in the NYSESLAT. The testing coordinator with the ESL coordinator reviews the ATS reports RLER, RLAT, RYOS, to appropriately create groupings for each standardized exam with students receiving testing accomodations accordingly. 6b. Our newcomers participate in our Basic Skills RTI program where the ESL teachers collaborate with teachers who speak their native language to provide content clarification, specialized instruction for first year ELLS in math, and transferring reading skills from their native language for second year ELLS in English Language Arts. Technology,visuals, photo libraries, bilingual picture dictionaries and other supplementary materials are available for ESL teachers and content area teachers for newcomers. The newcomers are involved in our language clubs where they meet students with their same native language and receive group support while completing academic activities. Additionally, they receive counseling and more experiential type of educational activities, such as trips. 6c. In addition to mandated ESL periods , for the students that have been in the program 4-6 years, we have implemented a separate small group instructional time per grade level with ESL teachers . The instruction focuses on their deficiencies in the NYSESLAT, ELL periodic assessments, and data chats. Baseline writing samples are taken for strategic writing instruction tailored to each child. ESL teachers and content areas use the data to inform instruction and create differentiated activities. 6d. ELLS that have received services for more than 6 years receive instruction in a small group setting per grade level with ESL teachers, where we utilize data form the NYSESLAT, diagnostic assessments and ELL periodic assessments to focus on areas of improvement. Additionally , the data is utilized to identify areas of strength . If there is no progress after all our effort we will refer him/her to the appropriate committee (PPC, I.E.P) for possible evaluation. However, if the students are already in a special education setting, we address instructional delivery practices and ensure that goals are relevant and obtainable. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Similarly, we ensure that lessons are scaffolded, student’s attention span, impulsivity and distractability are considered when planning lessons .Instruction is aligned to the CCLS and tasks are differentiated and supported using a variety of supplemental materials such as visual ais, technology, and photo libraries. A variety of scaffolds are used to create differentiated tasks such 3  as , breaking down tasks into smaller assignments , simplifying directions, adapting text, and graphic organizers. ESL teachers have access to the IEPs of each student and refers to it when planning instruction and assessments. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? A students environment is considered when scheduling. ESL teachers in collaboration with classroom teachers, and other service providers, schedule services and plan instruction, in department meetings and preparation periods, in order to provide each child their mandated instruction and services according to their individual IEP. The ESL teachers collaborate with the classroom teachers in order to push in and pull out the SWDs . This will allow instruction to be done within the peers of their class and participate in collaborative groups with non-disabled peers according to their grade level. If a re-evaluation is needed it will be conducted. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Collaboration between the ESL teacher, AIS providers and their current ELA/content area teachers is frequent and ongoing through department meetings and preparation periods. These primary planning sessions will focus on customizing instruction in preparation for ELA , using Wilson and Fundations. Diagnostic assessments are given in order to create ELL target groups for both ELA, math, and content areas. During extended day ESL teachers and content area teachers collaborate to target these students utilizing the data from the diagnostics. ELLS needing targeted interventions for ELA are given instruction in small groups in extended day and Saturday Academy by a content area teacher and an ESL teacher. ELLS needing targeted interventions for math are given instruction in small groups in extended day and Saturday Academy by a content area teacher and an ESL teacher. Both Social Studies and Science teachers collaborate with the ELL Coordinator and ESL teachers to identify students in need of interventions. These students are seen in Extended Day and further support is given through the ESL teacher. Data reports ( Interim Assessment, RNMR, RLAT) , and class diagnostics, are used to identify students in need of interventions. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our Basic Skills RTI program is a initiative where school-wide benchmarks are given to each student. These grade level benchmarks address the competencies present to perform on standard based grade level tasks. The benchmarks allow the teachers and administration to identify the achievement gaps for the school as a whole and create target groups per grade. The target groups are identified as the at-risk students below grade level benchmarks. These students receive small group instructed tailored to the deficiencies present from the diagnostic tools. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs that are being discontinued from last year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ALL ELLS are invited to participate in all after-school programs: Technoloy, Xposure, Band. Technology and software with bilingual capabilities will be used during instruction in our after-school program. Furthermore, with Title III funding, we will begin a Saturday program for newcomer Immigrant ELLS and their parents using Oxford Picture Dictionaries, workbooks, and Side By Side texts. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used in the ESL program parallel those used in monolingual program in an effort to facilitate transition. The materials used are: Side by Side, (Balanced Literacy reading and Writing Workshop Models), WordlyWise, and a extended range of print, visual and digital resources. This year we will be introducing the lenovo tablet for instruction, a tool for supplemental materials, and native language support. Various websites ,such as the Children's International Library, provide native language interactive texts and visuals students may utilize. For use in the content areas, photo libraries, such as our Science photo library provide visuals and vocabulary support for the ELLS. The Content Area teachers in collaboration with 4  ESL teachers utilize various websites ( free translation, pete's power points, google images, edhelper, freeology, brain pop, cool math games) for native language support, scaffolds, supplementary materials and differentiated tasks in the content areas in order for students to build technical and digital proficiency. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our ESL teachers and Instructors/translators (from our SIFE program) are bilingual and provide native language support necessary for beginners in order to transfer skills from their native language to English. Native language instruction is used support higher order thinking in demanding and challenging areas of instruction. Decisions on language use in instruction are based on data ,student needs, language levels, and challenging content . The language of student products is determined according to student needs. Student products are differentiated according to the strengths and areas of improvement. In the ESL classroom , there is evidence of student work displayed in both student's native language and English. Charts, vocabulary, word walls provide a print-rich environment in both the student's home language and English. Due to these supports there is a consistency of home language and English usage. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All services (ESL, AIS, SIFE initiative ) instruction and support are standard based CCLS corresponding to the students grade and age. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials used in the ESL program parallel those used in monolingual program in an effort to facilitate transition. The materials used are: Sise by Side, (Balanced Literacy reading and Writing Workshop Models), Word Wise, and a extended range of print, visual and digital resources. This year we will be introducing the lenovo tablet for instruction, a tool for supplemental materials, and native language support. Various websites , such as the Children's International Library, provide native language interactive texts and visuals students may utilize. For use in the content areas, photo libraries, such as our Science photo library provide visuals and vocabulary support for the ELLS. The Content Area teachers in collaboration with ESL teachers utilize various websites ( free translation, pete's power points, google images, edhelper, freeology, brain pop, cool math games) for native language support, scaffolds, supplementary materials and differentiated tasks in the content areas in order for students to build technical and digital proficiency. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLS are given support through our SIFE family orientation (Guidance counselor, ESL teacher and family), and our after school programwhere counseling,technology, native language libraries and information on the ESL program is available for students and parents. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? A language elective being offered to ELLS currently is Spanish. Through instruction and technology students acquire listening , speaking, reading and writing skills in Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a 5  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development and Support for School Staff The effectiveness of our program is strongly dependent on professional development which meets the needs of teachers of second language learners. Mutual preps have been scheduled in the master program so that teachers can meet for workshops, planning sessions and collaborative projects. Some of our topics will include: • Response to Intervention • Bilingual/ESL Compliance/CR PART 154 • Using data to drive instruction (NYSESLAT/NYSITELL • ELLs Periodic Assessment, Performance Series and Acuity • SIOP Model • Scaffolding • Infusing technology and Realia (Using Smart Boards /Ipads) Language Allocation Policy (changes and status) . Sentence Frames . Differentiation, Learning Language Needs and Effective Practices for ELLS . Accountable Talk for ELLS Developing Academic language Through Content Current ESL/ Bilingual Research A professional development binder is maintained with agendas, sign-in sheets and feedback from teachers. This records a log of the professional development done by each teacher. Teachers are encouraged to attend off-site workshops and seminars related to ELLS. The parent coordinator provides professional development and conferences with individual teachers with the focus of maintaining open lines of communication with parents. He provides opportunities through parent workshops, and school events geared towards building cohesiveness and cooperation between parents and staff. The school leadership is formed through a collaboration of administration, parents and teachers . Using data, teachers, parents, and administrators on the school leadership team continually voice concerns, suggestions, and possible outcomes to administration in order to make informed decisions . They provide support to the staff through this continual feedback of staff , parent and students needs. The LAP implementation and refinement plan is reviewed by the school leadership team and included in the CEP. The guidance counselor receives professional development on 8th grade articulation, newly arrived students, temporary housing, conflict resolution, cultural sensitivity, social and emotional development. Our guidance counselor is currently completing a bilingual extension. Due to her knowledge base on bilingual education and professional development, she provides turn-key training. Additionally, the guidance counselor supports staff through professional development of social, emotional, and behavioral needs and strategies to equip teachers with the appropriate tools to assist all students. The guidance counselor assist ELLS as they transition through individual conferences, participation in the language clubs, and direct communication with parents . SEE QUESTION #1 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We hold an after school ELL academy that is led by the school's Guidance Counselor and an ESL teacher. Students and their parents receive academic, placement, and information in a structured setting from once a week to 1x monthly as per interest to support the transition to secondary placement. Professional Development for teachers as per CR Part 154.2: is embedded in the school's comprehensive professional development plan. One Monday professional development session per month is devoted to specifically addressing the needs of English language learners with a focus on such topics as: language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching strategies and 6  integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Agenda and attendance sign off sheets are kept in the school-wide professional development binder in the Principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our school maintains an open door policy with regards to all our parents including our English Language Learners’ parents. To foster proper communication and to make our parents feel comfortable, we have staff members who are capable of communicating in Spanish and French, as such, we utilize their linguistic abilities to service our parents. This year we will invite parents of Immigrant ELLS to attend our Saturday Academy , parent and student ESL classes. In these classes parents will be able to learn English along side their children. The teachers, supervisors and parent coordinator keep the parents informed through monthly meetings, workshops and literature. Letters, phone calls and electronic message means are used to invite them to all meetings and to send them information. The ELLs students’ orientation video is shown to all our parents of newly enrolled English Language Learners, allowing parents to become aware as to our approaches of assisting their children to proficiently acquire the English language. Additionally parents are given the ESL parent handbook describing our entire ESL program,which informs parents how our LAP is implemented in our school. As a result of effectively disseminating information to parents, they have been able to make informed decisions in selecting or accepting the programs for their children offered. Although parent requests are aligned with our program in place, we remain open to parental feedback and suggestions. Following each workshop, we provide parents with an opportunity to express concerns, suggestions and ask questions. A parent feedback form is given. Parents are given the opportunity to express any needs, or the suggested topics of further workshops. Parents are encouraged to respond in their native language. Additionally, the parent coordinator is implementing monthly workshops. Workshops are targeting various topics to support parent ability to make educational decisions for the child and receive support accessing DOE initiatives. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELl parent involved is encouraged through ELL parent workshops, invitations to school wide parent workshops hosted by the PTA and parent coordinator, monthly PRIDE celebrations, and invitations to community events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Key foci in our ELL program are -Teacher Collaboration through Inquiry, Teacher Teams, Co-teaching of Sheltered English Class -Data Driven Instruction (NYSESLAT, , Grade Level Basic Skills Benchmarks, Common Core Performance Task) - Professional Development on ELL Instruction personalized to teacher and Student Needs. -Intervention provided in different formats (Small group according to grade, basic skills deficiencies modality focus) -Continual Monitoring of Student Progress. -Socio-Emotional Support of Students and Parents through Guidance supports 7  8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Gloria Ford Anderson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: the Multicultural Magnet Schoo School DBN: 12x212 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Gloria Ford Anderson Principal Assistant Principal Orlando Cardoza Parent Coordinator Claudio Estrella ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Belkis Pena/ESL Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12x212 School Name: T Superintendent: Rafaela Espinal The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At registration, parents complete a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) for their child/ren. An informal interview is completed by designated pedagogue from the school ELL deparment , Ms. Pena (ESL teacher/Spanish or Italian) who is able to speak in their native language and English. Designated translators are available if needed , Mr Estrella (ESL teacher/Spanish or French) or Ms. Mpowa (School Counselor/Spanish/French). Based on their responses, we are able to ascertain the language spoken , written and read by the parents. The informal interview with the student and parent informs us about the parents country of origin, and languages spoken. The parents are provided with school wide information including special ESL services in English, Spanish and French. The ESL teachers coordinate services based on grade bands (Ms. Pena - grades K-5, Mr. Estrella- grades 6-8) , and the testing Coordinator review the various ATS reports (RLER,RLAT RESI,BIOS) to ensure every ELL is identified properly. This data reinforces the information given in the home langauge survey, and interview, and allows us to properly identify the language spoken by the parents. 1  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Based on the data we use to review our students and parents language needs - the Home Language Surveys, Program Selection forms for the past few years, and biographical data of our students, we have discovered that although our ELLs come from diverse multicultural backgrounds such as Africa, Asia, Caribbean, and South America, they mostly speak and understand Spanish and French. Therefore, we have deliberately acquired Spanish and French teachers to teach the students using ESL methodologies to instruct the students. Additionally, every piece of document that goes home to parents is translated into Spanish and French. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2 How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families -School Calendars. -The MMS Journal - a biweekly newsletter created for parents by the Principal that contains invites, reminders, and updates to calendar events. -Flyers for school events- Parent and Teacher Conferences, School Closings, Trips. -Parent Handbook -Afterschool/Saturday Academy information 1. Staff Members. All Department of Education documents, formal and/or informal, are translated and provided to parents by our capable staff members who speak French and Spanish fluently. 2. Parent Volunteers. Our school has a pool of parents that speak Mandigo, Wolof and Fulani who are called upon to support Parent activities. 3. NYCDOE - The Translation and Interpretation Unit is an important part of the Department of Education's language access initiative which aims to enhance the organization's ability to communicate with and better engage limited-English-proficient parents of New York City school children. The Unit provides New York City public schools and offices with an internal resource for accessing written translation and oral interpretation services. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 3  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? -Monthly Workshops for Parents of ELLs -Parent Teacher Conferences- September, November, March, and May -Daily attendance calls PRN- Parent Coordinator and Family Worker. -Multicultural Day- Celebration - March 2016 Parent Orientation for High School - September, October, and November. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent Coordinator is the designated liaison who ensures that all parents have access to materials and human resources to meet their language needs. The Parent Coordinator coordinates services with all staff on site including the disemination of resources e.g. List of staff who speak multiple languages, and provide training on how to use translation services over the phone. It is the parent coordinator's responsibility to ensure that notices of language assistance services are posted and made available as needed to families. 4  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will utilize the learning environment survery to identify overal trends and patterns in parents responses in the area of communication. In addition, parents will be invited to complete a brief survey at the end of every visit to the school regarding their experience with a section on recommendations on how the school could better meet their needs. This feedback will be used to personalize services for the school community. 5 
