2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X217 School Name: SCHOOL OF PERFORMING ARTS Principal: DIONNE WILLIAMS 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: Section 1: School Information Page School Information I.S. 217 School of Performing Arts 12X217 321200010217 School Number (DBN): 6-8 977 Fox Street Bronx, New York 10459 School Address: 718-589-4844 Phone Number: 718-589-7998 Fax: Dionne O Williams DWilliams26@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): RisingGround Dionne Williams Dickson Polanco BarkeeWilkes David Irizarry Dionne Williams David Irizarry n/a n/a District Information Geographical District: 12 Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Superintendent’s Office Address: 1970 West Farms Rd, Bronx NY 10460 jrosado2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-2310 Phone Number: 718-542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY 10458 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X x X X Name Position and Constituent Group Dionne O. Williams BarkeeWilkes David Irizarry Maria Morales David Irizarry Dickson Polanco Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) HaydeeRodriguez MigdaliaMartinez Naomi Coreas TieshaRobinson Miriam El-Amin Cassandra Akpan Victoria Marrazzo Jessica Monroe Kayla Murray Hazel Robinson X X X X X X X X Parent Parent Parent Parent Parent Staff Staff Staff Staff CBOStaff Member/ Member/ Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Julia Ortiz Dickson Polanco Victoria Marrazzo George Roberts 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Represented Parent Coordinator Community School Director Teacher Teacher Signature (Blue Ink) 11  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Bertram Knight Assistant Principal Peter Klueber Anne Rueth David Irizarry BarkeeWilkes Victoria Marrazzo Jennifer Lopez Cassandra Akpan n/a n/a n/a Dean Social Worker PArepresentative UFTchapter leader Teacher Model Teacher Teacher n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. I.S. 217 School of Performing Arts (12X217) is a middle school located in the Hunts Point neighborhood of the South Bronx and serves 303 students in grades 6-8. The mission of I.S. 217 is to recognize students as individuals and help them apply classroom learning to everyday life and to become creative problem solvers. We focus on improving professional practices, effectively implementing Common Core Learning Standards and providing enrichment experiences in order to promote students' ability to build positive relationships and value their education. Although many students live in the school’s surrounding neighborhoods, most travel by train and/or bus from other parts of the Bronx. The community that the school serves faces exceptional barriers to socio-economic success and full participation in the democratic process. The negative effects that poverty and chronic stress have on students’ ability to learn and reach high academic and social achievement has been well documented in books such as Teaching with Poverty in Mind by Eric Jensen, and How Children Succeed by Paul Tough. As a community school, we must bring together multifaceted resources in order for families and students to transcend these barriers to success and empower them to become responsible and productive citizens who serve their communities and society. Research shows that developing community schools that provide a wide array of physical and mental health services, adult education, after-school and weekend enrichment, and family support services improve attendance, academic achievement, and community economics. While community school wrap-around services are necessary, they alone are not enough to bring about deep sustainable school improvement. Research shows that in order for the model to be successful high poverty schools must also ensure that all teachers have the skills and resources necessary to deliver high quality effective instruction each day. Our school seeks to create the conditions where teachers can thrive and grow professionally. Through continuous and targeted professional development and the implementation of the Advance Teacher Development and Evaluation system, we will ensure that the school exemplifies strong instructional practices and provides a challenging curriculum that meets the needs of all students. I.S. 217 has forged several strategic partnerships to complement the existing community partnerships. These partnerships help form a strong foundation for improving teacher and leader practice and student outcomes. The partnerships are discussed more fully below. At the start of the 2015-2016 school year, as part of the Community School Model, Leake & Watts, now known as Rising Ground, became the lead CBO at I.S. 217. Rising Ground, focuses on creating a culture of student and family enrichment, improving physical and mental health, and embedding evidence based programming about socio-emotional learning into school staffs' daily practices. Leake & Watts staff members sit on all of IS 217's major teams, including the Principal's Cabinet, and hold leadership roles on the RTI team and the attendance team. Rising Ground staff members are fully embedded in the daily work being done to improve achievement at I.S. 217. Some of their tasks include providing individual and group mental health services and crisis intervention services to a high number of students and families, planning instructional trips including college visits, overseeing ELT and coordinating services with a number of the other CBOs that operate in the building, hosting parent workshops and informing families of 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  services that are available both in their community and the city in general, and planning professional development opportunities for teachers that increase their skill set in addressing socio-emotional needs. Our partnership with the Leadership Program will allow our school to improve attendance and strengthen discipline and student support systems by reviewing, revising, and adopting new or improved policies, roles and responsibilities, expectations, rules, procedures, and accountable consequences. We will specify clear behavioral supports and interventions in to maximize each and every student’s success in school and foster academic, social, and emotional development. An assessment of our student population reveals that many of our most at-risk students would benefit from a strong research-based mentor relationship. To that end we will be partnering with the Leadership Program. Through this program, social work interns will work one-on-one with identified students to (1) set goals; (2) stay on track with academics; (3) develop skills to be successful and (4) combat peer pressure. Students will also participate in an after school leadership development program that will include an arts component as well as community service. We currently have an on-site Montefiore School Health Clinic that provides general physical health services, dental services, and mental health services. In addition, they provide a host of health related workshops and field trips for families and students. I.S. 217 also has an existing partnership with SISDA and SoBRO, two community based organizations that provide job training, computer classes, ENL classes, adult education, counseling, youth development services, and family support services to youth and families in the Hunts Point community. There are also a long-standing relationship with the Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation, who provide a variety of after-school and Saturday enrichment activities for our students. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? This year, in partnership with Generation Ready, our school embarked on the process of enhancing our shared understanding of how students learn best. After reading and discussing research on instructional best practices and adolescent development our school community developed an instructional vision and set of instructional practices that will be implemented with fidelity in each and every classroom. We believe that students learn best when they are presented with content that is challenging and relevant to their own lives and circumstances. In addition, students learn best when teachers explicitly model strategies and skills and provide students with opportunities for choice in practicing these skills and applying them to real life situations. Finally, we believe that students learn best when they are provided with regular conferences with immediate feedback to deepen their understanding.Students also learn best when they are engaged in student-to-student discussions where they are challenged to explain and justify their thinking grounded in evidence. Our instructional focus for the 2017-2018 school year directly aligns to our beliefs regarding how students learn best. We propose that if teachers create open ended questions, utilize round robin and placemat protocols with discussion stem starters , this will promote equity of voices, increased participation in discussion and increased ownership for students' learning. This will also provide opportunities for frequent checks for understanding followed by actionable feedback, real time support , remediation and enrichment and as a result ,increased learning for all students will take place. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. I.S. 217, the School of Performing Arts, serves a diverse population of students with a unique set of needs that range from academic to social emotional. The school population is made up of 67% Hispanic, 28% Black or African American, and 0.59% White. Nearly 96% of our student population lives below the poverty level with 92% of our student population receiving free lunch and 3.70% receiving a reduced lunch. Students with special needs represent 29% of our student population. In addition, to special educational instructional services, our special education students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  receive a variety of support from service providers such as speech therapy, physical therapy, occupational therapy, hearing specialists and SETSS services. Our special education students need intense diagnosis of specific learning barriers so that they can be taught strategies and skills to compensate for and over-come these barriers. Many of our Special Education students are reading at an early elementary school level and could benefit from intense daily reading intervention using a research based model that is appropriate for middle school age students. Another sub-group of concern is our English as a New Language Learners representing over 22% of our student population. Many of our ENL students are potentially first generation high school graduates and future college students. Over 92% of our ENL families are Hispanic and speak Spanish within the home. They may not able to foster and encourage the acquisition and use of English as a second language. Our ENL students need further development and education in their native language so that they can transfer these skills into their English language learning projects. Many of our ENL would benefit from a bi-lingual program. We also have 50% of our students who are reading 2 grade levels behind or more and 25% who are overage. Finally 20% of our students and families live in temporary shelters and many have NYC Administration for Children’s Services (ACS) cases. These students often need additional resources, mentoring, counseling and support. Describe the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which the school made the most progress over the past year, and which elements remain most challenging. Be sure to include the historical progress the school has made with establishing family and community partner engagement. Over the past year we have made the most progress in has been made in the elements of Collaborative Teachers and Effective School Leadership. This year, the school leader, in collaboration with the School Leadership Team, acquired additional resources for the school through a grant and forged strategic partnerships designed to enhance teacher pedagogy and social and emotional support for students. In addition, the school leader developed a monitoring and evaluation system for school-wide goals and benchmarks. Our teachers continued to participate in weekly Professional Development sessions and Professional Learning teams where they analyzed data and student work, completed lesson plans and unit of study .Most of the time in teacher teams was spent creating rigorous Common Core-aligned tasks. Teachers engaged in professional development on meeting the needs of individual learners through ongoing checks for understanding, recording the evidence of mastery and then providing in-the-moment support through small group support , differentiated tasks or remediation strategies. The elements that remain most challenging are Rigorous Instruction and developing Strong Family-Community Ties. I.S. 217 communicates with parents through student/parent handbook, regular PA meetings, the school website, a monthly calendar, periodic letters/flyers home, and an automatic phone messenger system. All communications are sent home in both English and Spanish and the DOE translation unit is utilized when another language is necessary. I.S. 217 employs a Parent Coordinator who has an open door policy and is available to meet with parents without requiring an appointment. The Parent Coordinator regularly assesses needs of parents and has assisted in the selection of partnerships and community resources to address identified needs. Parents also volunteer throughout the year for class trips, celebrations, and book fairs. The School Based Support Team and CSE team maintain regular communication with parents regarding student progress, issues and goals. The Attendance team also meets several times per month to review attendance data and plan interventions, as well as an RTI Team. I.S. 217 has adopted an extended parent teacher conference model whereby parents meet with a single core subject area teacher for a half hour to discuss student data and receive tips and tools for improving students’ academic skills. The new Parent & Teacher Conference structure allows parents, teachers and students to discuss targeted next steps for academic success and social emotional growth. Parents were provided with online access to Pupil Path. Parents are also given extensive information regarding their child’s performance as well as information about the school, its’ performance and its’ planning for the future. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  The school hosts middle school orientation for all incoming students to communicate academic expectations. In addition, I.S. 217 has offered workshops to parents focusing on the new CCLS curriculum and standards, academic expectations and providing parents with training on what they can do to help students at home. I.S. 217 has also begun hosting on-going workshops to better enable parents to understand an individual student’s issues and needs and the resources that are available and necessary. Although the school offers numerous parent workshops on topics such as the CCLS, Adolescent Development, and preparing for High School, thus far attendance has been on the rise, yet, greater attendance is necessary for the workshops to have the desired impact. We have also offered ENL and Computer classes to parents. List strong partnerships that currently exist with CBOs and or indicate whether this has been a challenge. As noted above, through the Community School Model we have a strong partnership with Rising Ground who are our lead CBO. They provide on-site mental health services, student activities, attendance monitoring, parent engagement, and support for Extended Learning Time (ELT). In addition to providing critical services over the last year and a half, Rising Ground's Community School Director also coordinates programs, providers, and activities that meet the needs of our learning community. The addition of the Community School Director has actually removed some challenges as he meets with representatives from the various programs to schedule events and resolve issues. He also works with other CBOs to eliminate overlapped activities and services in order to bring forth other services or programs that meet other needs and interests. The Lead Clinician with Rising Ground is a constant source of socio-emotional support and has strong collaborative relationships with the school guidance counselor, the dean, the director of special education services and the parent coordinator. We are making significant progress as a community where students are taught to ask for help and support in building their skills, rather than being punished for their mistakes. All students in the building are engaged in some kind of programming with Rising Ground ranging from crisis intervention, individual and group counseling and instructional trips to colleges and Broadway shows. It is clear that Leake & Watts staff are willing to support filling in any gaps that exist for our students by monitoring hallways, assisting with the high school admissions process, taking the lead in supporting students with summer programming and SYEP applications, and obtaining holiday gifts, uniforms, school supplies, and basic hygiene products for our students. The Leadership Program The Leadership Program has a proven track record for supporting at risk students by leading successful school mentorship programs and providing direct mentorship services to at-risk students. During the 2016-2017 school year they supported our most at-risk students through a comprehensive one-on-one mentorship program. SISDA The Simpson Street Development Association, SISDA, has been serving the South Bronx Community for 50 years. SISDA offers a variety of after school enrichment programs to our students and programming for adults. These activities are tailored to the students interests and include dance, computer technology, sports and martial arts. Adult programs include ENL, citizenship, and high school equivalency classes. SISDA is also an SYEP (Summer Youth Employment) provider. In addition, SISDA also hosts Holiday Camps during school vacations and a summer day camp in July and August. Montefiore’s School Health Program (MSHP) Montefiore’s School Health Program provides comprehensive primary, preventative and continuing health care to our school community. Services include health maintenance examinations, immunizations, screening tests, first aid for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  injuries and emergencies, diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic medical problems, as well as secondary and tertiary care referrals. Circle Forward Advisory Program This socio-emotional curriculum focuses on building strong relationships through lessons on communication, cooperation, connection, diversity, and conflict resolution. AileyDance Kids Residency AileyDance Kids, an extension of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, offers dance in a comprehensive format aligned to the New York City Department of Education's Blueprint For Teaching and Learning in Dance. These offerings inspire self-respect and confidence, while also fostering an appreciation for the joy of dance. Renaissance Youth Center Students learn the rudiments of building community by way of team-building educational activities such as band, music and sports. Keyboard, drums, guitar, and voice are the instruments students learn how to play in order to build self-confidence and camaraderie with others as a foundation for community. Generation Ready Consultants provide targeted support to teachers ranging from curriculum, unit, and lesson planning to demonstrating effective reading and writing strategies. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. During the past year, we have offered a robust ELT program and we will expand the program next year. Through our 21st Century Community Learning Center Grant we are able to provide opportunities for academic enrichment (including tutoring services) to help students meet state and local standards in core subjects. There are also a broad array of additional services, programs and activities that develop youth through sports, art, music, and recreation programs. These include: cosmetology; music production , dance, soccer and basketball. SGI, or Small Group Instruction, provides students with the opportunity to receive targeted instruction based on areas of need; after school, Saturday Enrichment program, Spring break and Winter Academy programs which are also open to all students, especially those identified as low-performing according to the data. The arts will also be a feature of ELT as we will provide Carribbean dance, visual arts, and a life-skills program for 6th graders. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X217 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 300 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 59 57 4 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 24 4 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 95.0% % Reduced Lunch 18.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.7% 63.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.4 10% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A YSH YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 26 28 90.1% 1.3% 32.7% 31.3% 2.0% 2.3% 2 38% 9.4 14.5% 37% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A YSH YSH NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 3.2 Strengths ● The school leader has adopted curricula such as Expeditionary Learning and Educating Powerful Writers for ELA, Carnegie and Go Math for mathematics, Passport to History for social studies, and Glencoe for science. These programs are aligned to and will guide teachers’ implementation of the CCLS (DTSDE Report Tenet 3.2). Needs ● There was no evidence of a comprehensive curriculum plan to implement the programs across all subject areas and grades. Some teachers indicated that they are unclear on how to use the new curriculum effectively. ● Lessons did not reflect CCLS and did not include differentiation to meet the students’ needs. The lack of a comprehensive plan to implement curricula appropriately aligned to the CCLS, limits students’ access to a fully aligned CCLS experience to develop college- and career-readiness skills. ● Based on multiple data sources elements are not consistently taught at the recommended level of cognitive demand. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20  ● Some standards are not taught at all, while others that do not need to be addressed are taught. (DTSDE Report Tenet 3.2) 3.3 Strengths ● The school schedule allows time for daily common planning. (DTSDE Report Tenet 3.3) Needs ● CCLS standards are inconsistently implemented and the language objectives and strategies in lesson plans do not reflect data use or adjustments based on student needs. ● Limited evidence of differentiation to support English as a New Language learners (ENL) students and students with disabilities in the pacing guide templates and partially completed lesson plan templates reviewed, and class lessons observed. ● Teachers need to pose rigorous questions and increase opportunities for students to think deeply ● Incomplete planning and a lack of development of strategies to meet specific student needs hinder students from showing growth in meeting the demands of the CCLS. (DTSDE Report Tenet 3.) ● The lack of alignment between the curriculum and assessment and inconsistent feedback provided to students does not support students in developing ownership of their learning, which limits opportunities for students to improve academic achievement. (DTSDE Report Tenet 3.5) Major Finding from AIR Co-Interpretation: Based on multiple data sources elements of the CCLS are not consistently taught in the recommended level of cognitive demand (rigor) or in alignment with recommended grade-level focus areas. Data Trends & Priority Needs: During the 2017-2018 school year the percentage of students who scored proficient on the ELA state exam was 18%, however, the percentage of students who scored proficient on the State Math Exam was 9%. The percentage of students who scored Level 1 on the ELA State Exam decreased while the percentage who scored Level 1 on the Math State Exam increased. An analysis of the ELA and Math State Exam item analysis and exam scores revealed that some of the most heavily emphasized standards were not adequately addressed in the school's enacted curriculum. Based on these findings one of the priority needs for the school is to continue to develop and implement a CCLS aligned curricula in all content areas, across all subjects that reflect the instructional shifts, appropriate level of rigor and multiple entry points to meet the needs of all students. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  Our instructional focus is: If students are engaged in conversations with each other through round robin protocol and placemat protocols, then critical thinking will become more visible in the classroom and student to student interaction will increase. If teachers engage in collaborative inquiry as an approach to professional learning, then students' learning needs and gaps will be identified, problems of practice shared, tasks will be differentiated, small group support provided, and student achievement will increase. This instructional focus is embedded in our school-wide beliefs which are to be used to plan instruction daily, 1. The Workshop model evident in every lesson- Do Now, (real world connections - 5mins) explicit instruction (10-15 mins),guided practice (5mins), small group, independent practice (20-25 mins). 2. Closure in every lesson. (5 mins) 3. Discussions that are framed by open -ended questions crafted in advance in order to promote high levels of thinking. DOK charts and Hess's cognitive rigor chart should be referred to when planning each lesson to ensure that students have the opportunities to analyze, evaluate ,synthesize and create. 4.Activities must promote high level thinking and allow all students to produce meaningful work products. 5. Explicit teaching of classroom discussion norms or protocols. Student to student discussion at least twice throughout the lesson. Placemat protocols and round robin strategies will be utilized to ensure every student participates and there is equity of voice. 6. Small group instruction- Differentiation of instruction through tiered activities and a variety of supports( re-teach etc). Evidence and rationale for grouping must be apparent. 7. On-going collection and recording of students' level of understanding. Use the information recorded to modify instruction during the lesson and in future lessons. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  8. Self and peer assessment using criteria for quality work ( exemplars or rubrics) will occur in every lesson. Students will utilise checklist/exemplars to monitor their own progress. 9. Immediate and specific feedback to deepen students' learning. 10. Academic and content vocabulary must be introduced and referred to during each lesson. Model how to use the vocabulary during discussions and writing daily.Students will create their own interactive notebooks in all content areas. 11. Reading and writing across all content areas; provide opportunities for students to read authentic texts and annotate them each and every day. 12. Students' responses must be grounded in textual evidence at all times. The school currently utilizes the Expeditionary Learning program, Teachers College Writing Program, IReady Math ,Finish Line Math and the DOE Social Studies and Science Core curriculum resources. As discussed more fully in the action plan below, The school leadership team, teachers and educational experts will work together to refine the curriculum to meet the needs of all students and ensure that the instructional shifts are evident. During the Expanded Learning Time teachers will engage students in iReady ELA and Math instruction. The school will continue to implement a common assessment program that will be overseen by the data specialist/testing coordinator. All teachers will receive continuous professional development on data driven instruction and they will analyze the data during PLT meetings in order to revise curriculum. By the end of year 3 (2016-2017) of the Renewal School program we expect at least 75% of students to demonstrate measurable growth on the ELA and Math State Exams. In order to engage parents and build a stronger partnership the school will participate in the Academic Parent Teacher Team program whereby parents will learn the CCLS grade level expectations, review data trends related to specific skills and standards, and learn specific strategies that they can use at home to help their child reach academic goals. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? Our vision is to provide clear expectations and professional development to implement CCLS-aligned curricula. For the successful delivery of curricula it is critical that staff, students, and families understand what students will be learning, why they will be learning it and also how they will be learning. Students must be engaged in a clear explanation of the standards-based lesson objective, how it fits into the broader unit, and its application to the world outside the classroom. Through on-going professional development teachers will be able to engage in grade and content-level 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  discussions with colleagues about how to use the curriculum effectively in order to make the greatest impact on students and their outcomes. We also believe that students need to take ownership of their learning .As a result of this, the emphasis this year will be on exposing and front-loading students with clear success criteria which teachers will use to provide students with targeted feedback and students using the rubric/checklist to monitor their own progress / improve the quality of work they produce. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? In addition to our core course offerings we plan to offer Advisory, music/band, chorus, guided reading/independent reading and an academic intervention program. These offerings will speak to the diversified skills and interests our students possess, create multiple entry points into other disciplines, and provide targeted support. Instructional Shifts in math and ELA are embedded in these offerings as students will read a balance of informational and literary texts; read text on their own level and receive support for more difficult text; write from sources using evidence; academic vocabulary; apply mathematics to reading music and playing instruments; use math in other subjects; and develop a deep understanding of math concepts as they pertain to music, statistics, and data. The meshing of these concepts will encourage students to be creative, make real-world connections, and use critical thinking skills which are all necessary to be successful in college and careers. All students will also attend at least one college campus visit this year. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? Delivery of instruction will be administered via the workshop model as it fosters explicit modeling/demonstration, student work, assessment and timely feedback. During the mini-lesson, students will be exposed to a learning target. Our diverse learners will be served as they will receive modeling along with opportunities for guided and independent practice, enabling teachers to assess, provide specific feedback, and differentiate by re-teaching to small groups while releasing others to move forward. Students will also receive small group support based on the evidence of mastery/lack of mastery of skills taught during the mini-lesson. Students will also receive additional small group support based on data collected from formative assessments. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers will use formative assessment data to strategically group students to better accommodate their needs. Lessons will feature choice in the form of leveled text, differentiated tasks, and the use of placemat protocols and round robin strategies to help students make their thinking visible. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? We envision a comprehensive assessment strategy that in which we administer diagnostics to establish baselines, use daily formative assessment data to adjust instruction and groupings to foster understanding, then benchmark and summative assessments to measure student progress periodically. Teachers will meet in grade-level and content area teams to analyze this data and revise curricular and instructional decisions to create greater impact on student outcomes. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) DRP i-Ready Diagnostic Diagnostic,formative 6,7,8 6,7,8 Diagnostic, formative 6,7,8 New York State benchmark assessments End of unit assessments Part 3 – Annual Goal reading comprehension assessment measures student performance and growth in math & ELA as they relate to CCLS; provides targeted skill development Measures students' performance growth in ELA and math formative 6,7,8 measures students' progress Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, using data-driven protocols, all teacher teams will analyze pre and post unit tests, bi-weekly quizzes, and relevant tasks in an effort to refine planning and grouping. This will result in a 12% increase in students' proficiency on the New York State ELA exam and a 10% increase on the Math state exam. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average Math Proficiency rating Average ELA Proficiency rating 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Selected teachers and school leaders will engage in curriculum refinement sessions to refine and prepare culminating tasks and weekly/biweekly assessments in math and ELA classes.These assessments will provide consistent sources of data to allow for students' strengths and weaknesses to be identified and addressed. School leaders and teachers will clearly articulate a statement of how students learn best which is aligned to Danielson and the Instructional shifts and develop a 7-10 instructional best practices that will be used during all lessons. School leaders and coaches will deepen teachers' understanding of the instructional shifts in ELA and Math and comprehension of Danielson domains ( 1E and 3B) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) all teacher teams math proficiency and ELA proficiency June; July 2018 data specialist, administration All teachers Average proficiency in ELA and Math September 2018 School administrators, coaches, consultants, teacher mentor, teachers All teachers Average proficiency in ELA and Math September 2018 Administrators, coaches, teacher mentors How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) progress will be monitored by data analysis in teams as well as monitoring students' performance and administration monitoring and supporting lesson planning These best practices will be evident in daily instruction and evidenced through MOTP reports in Advance Activities and tasks of DOK 3 and 4 Evidence of instructional shifts in ELA and math in daily lessons 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26 All teachers Average proficiency in ELA and Math September 2018- June 2019 Administrators, coaches, mentors differentiated tasks Students engaged in tasks and activities for at least 25 minutes of classroom instructional time Revised curricular adjustments evident in curriculum maps Average proficiency in ELA and Math September 2018 – June 2019 School Leaders, Coaches, and educational consultants. Regular walk-throughs will be conducted and teachers provided with feedback on alignment with respect to learning tasks and standards. They will engage in problems of practice around promoting critical thinking, differentiation,time allocations for and explicit time allocation. Refining and revising curriculum All teachers Teacher teams, school leaders, and educational consultants will collaborate and utilize protocols to refine and revise curriculum in order to ensure proper vertical & horizontal alignment, CCLS alignment, incorporation of instructional shifts, level of rigor and adaptations to meet the needs of ENL students and SWDs. Curriculum maps will also include the incorporation of researched based reading strategies in all content areas. ● Teacher teams, school-leaders, and consultants will analyze the data from the state assessment, interim assessments and school renewal assessment co-interpretation in order to identify 5-7 “power standards” in each core discipline. . ● Teacher teams, school leaders and consultants will 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  create/revise all weekly assessments, and end unit performance tasks, including alternative task for , SWDs, and AIS students. ● All maps will include realistic dates for implementation and completion, specific adaptations, resources, and instructional strategies to meet the needs of , SWDs, and AIS students. During daily team meetings teacher teams will utilize protocols to analyze data and student work to make effective adjustments to the curriculum & unit plans, provide differentiation for and SWDs, and identify specific instructional strategies/interventions to meet the needs of all students. The New Teacher Mentor will utilize the New Teacher Center (NTC) model to provide high quality research based mentoring to all new teachers (1-3 years) aligned to the Danielson Framework for teaching (Component 1E, 3B, 3D). All teachers Average proficiency in ELA and Math Sept. 2018– June 2019 School leaders, Coaches, and team leaders New Teachers, Principal, APs, Mentor Average proficiency in ELA and Math Sept 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Average proficiency in ELA and Math Sept 2018 -June 2019 Curriculum maps will include the following strategies: a) Think, Pair, Share All students including English language learners,students with disabilities and other high need students' subgroups Every school personnel including teachers, service providers and administration is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activities: School Leaders, Coaches, Grade Team Leaders. Evidence of strategies to meet needs of and SWDs- use of pictures, videos, stem starters open ended questions evident in lesson plans, accountable stem starters being used by students during classroom discussions Increased student to student interaction in classes, Students engaged in self or peer assessments 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  b) Whole group discussion- differentiated questions according to DOK levels c) Use of rubrics during activities d)) Use of round robin protocol and placemat protocol Average proficiency in ELA and Math Sept.2018-June 2019 Teachers, supervisors Increased student to student interaction Average proficiency in ELA and Math January 2019- June 2019 Teachers, administrators Increase in students' performance on unit assessments for students who attend these programs All students including students with disabilities,ENL studentsand other high need student subgroups Students scoring in the bottom third on ELA and Math State assessment Provide accountable talk protocols to allow students to initiate class discussions with minimal teacher support /direction The following programs will be offered to students: a) Saturday programs - Math and Literacy b) Saturday Literacy/Math program, Afterschool on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays for one hour c)),Winter Academy 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use designated Family Engagement time such as Family Night, Tuesday Parent Engagement, Parent Teacher Conferences, etc. as well as school-generated opportunities (awards ceremonies, performances) to inform families 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29  about expectations for students. This includes common core learning standards, grading policies, assessments, the use of assessment results to provide students with individualized, targeted support, and ways parents can support their child's learning at home. Key personnel will include everyone, that is from administration, to teaching staff, to parent coordinator, to CBO's to counseling team. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Teacher programs will include at least 1 period daily to work in PLTs. Tax levy funds will be utilized to to hire content area experts to engage teachers in curriculum map refinement and unit planning and provide per session to teachers. Funds will be allotted to hire a consultant to provide workshops and individual teacher coaching on UFunds will also be used to partially fund a full-time mentor shared with our campus neighbor. This individual will mentor new teachers in both schools by providing instructional coaching as part of the District 12 New Teacher Center Mentoring Program. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019 there will be a 6% increase of students who meet proficiency levels on the CCLS aligned ELA & 4% on Math interim assessments as a result of the work of Teacher Teams to develop coherent CCLS aligned tasks, activities, and assessments that meet the needs of all students. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. -End of unit assessments and Interim Assessment results (iReady results) -Bi-Weekly Assessments in ELA, History, and Science -Weekly Assessments in Math -Administration visits classrooms daily, provide teacher feedback within 24 hours, and document in a Google Drive doc to keep every member of the instructional team informed about the support given to each teacher and their progress. Progress Up to date : High Leverage Focus Area 2: Analysis of Student Work 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30  During teacher teams teachers share students' work gathered after instruction. Action Plan:  Analysis of student work utilizing collaborative Assessment Protocol  Analysis of mini-assessments in conjunction with power standards to identify gaps and regroup students bi-weekly High Leverage Focus Area 3: Analysis of Lesson Plan to ensure components of Explicit Instruction are included in daily instruction  Teachers will engage in this work during teacher team meetings.  During daily team meetings, each teacher will present his/her lesson.  Feedback will be given to teacher; Glows and Grows and steps needed to improve lesson planning/lesson planning process  Conduct teacher intervisitations to see if presenting teacher has implemented the feedback.  Instructional Cabinet will collect and analyze student work on a weekly basis as part of progress monitoring to inspect rigorous instruction. Immediate Next Steps Introduce staff to Mini-assessments (power standards)   Ensure these are addressed during SGI and ELT  Administer the mini-assessments bi-weekly  Analyze the results  Based on the analysis, incorporate these during daily instruction as differentiated tasks  Daily conferencing with students based on identified gaps Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths: All stakeholders routinely work together to refine a common understanding of the role that each member plays in creating a safe school community that is conducive to learning. The Lead Clinician from Rising Ground is part of the Cabinet, socio-emotional learning and mental health needs are regularly a part of administrative and school wide planning discussions. The school has implemented numerous policies and initiatives designed to support students' social and emotional growth. These include Advisory, Conflict Resolution Team/Peer Mediating, mentoring, The Leadership Program and targeted supports for students through the RTI team, the SIT team, and referral for on-site mental health services with Rising Ground and Montefiore on-site clinic. Needs: According to OORS Data, there was a 66% increase in incidents for the previous school year, 2017-2018. There is a need for a comprehensive approach to reduce incidents. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32  Ideally, all stakeholders would describe I.S. 217 as a school that nurtures students’ personal, emotional, and academic growth and empowers them to transcend all barriers to success. Stakeholders will describe I.S. 217 as a school that provides students with unique enrichment opportunities and prepares students to be accepted to top high schools. Finally, we would like our school described as one that teachers students to be respectful, responsible, and productive citizens who serve their communities. CBO relationships will continue to be strong, multi-faceted, and broad-based, serving the educational, socio-emotional, and health needs of our students and their families. The SLT and Community Schools Director under the leadership of the Principal will monitor the continued development of these relationships. If they are not adequately serving the needs of our school community, providers will be brought in who can. The CBO Lead Clinician will continue to assess students' need to extra support and provide both in school services and out of school referrals as needed. Student voice and leadership is primarily supported through the Student Council an annually elected group of student leaders from all classes. The school has adopted a guided and restorative approach to school discipline and student support. We utilize the principles of PBIS to foster social-emotional learning. Our school will measure social and emotional development through a variety of measures, including student surveys, parents surveys and classroom observations. We will also review data from student referrals and progress reports from Guidance Counselors, Social Work Interns, mentors and advisors. Teachers, community partners, and school leaders currently use data to respond to student social and emotional needs through the use of our grading and reporting system Skedula. Grades and student behavior is shared with parents and directly communicated during Parent-Teacher meetings. We will use the data to refer students to appropriate resources such as enrichment programs, social-emotional courses, counseling and leadership programs. I.S. 217’s attendance rates continue to rise; the combination of the above measures and our own attendance and family worker staff will continue to monitor both chronic truants as well as students who miss more than 2-3 days per month. In addition, our CBO partner Rising Ground will utilize the support of the Leadership RISE Program, DOE Family Worker, and Parent Coordinator to monitor and intervene with families who have attendance difficulties. Action plans will be developed, monitored and adjusted as necessary. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Rising Ground Mental Health, Student Activities/Incentives, Attendance Monitoring, Parent Engagement, and Supporting Extended Learning Time CBO Focus SISDA Supporting Extended learning time, students' activities- basketball,dance How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? The Parent Coordinator and Community School's Director, in consultation with the School Leadership Team (based on a needs' assessment), will create a comprehensive plan and calendar of workshops for parents. School leaders will continue to participate in the Academic Parent Teacher Team project which is designed to build parents' capacity to set goals for student progress and learn the academic skills necessary to help students thrive. Rising Ground Social Worker will facilitate 12 week, evidence based, Parenting Journey course to build capacity of parents. In addition, whenever parents meet with school-based support staff, including the Rising Ground team, they will be provided with non-judgmental, strengths based, and family focused services. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  SOBRO along with Rising Ground will engage parents by providing them with ENL and citizenship classes. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school community in collaboration with CBO partners will refine and consistently implement a school-wide guided discipline policy and student support system as measured by a 15% increase in responses of “agree” or “strongly agree” to questions that comprise the Safety measure of the Supportive Environment element of the NYC School Survey. Additionally, OORS reports incidents will decrease by 5%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average proficiency in Math Average proficiency in ELA 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Entire School Community NYC School Survey, OORS August 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, teacher leaders, guidance counselors,Dean Entire school community NYC School Survey September 2018 -June 2019 SEL team, administrators Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The Social Emotional Team (Leake and Watts social worker, school counselor, dean) will prepare an advisory curriculum to be used during the weekly advisory programs and plan workshops once per quarter for teachers to develop their social emotional skills and help them address the social and emotional developmental needs of students. Teachers will be engaged in monthly professional development sessions to develop their social emotional skills and help them address the social and emotional developmental needs of students. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) positive social behavior in students Improvement in positive responses for Supportive Environment indicators on the NYC School Survey Increasing positive relationship between students and teachers Improvement in positive responses for Supportive Environment 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  School leaders, teacher leaders and dean,Leake and Watts will partner to design a plan for rolling out I.S. 217’s school rules, consequences and aligned interventions to staff, students and parents. The school safety team will meet routinely to analyse incidents entered in OORS to examine the root causes of the incidents ,time, location, persons involved and consequences in order to design systems to reduce behavioral interventions. Promote Student Leadership Opportunities by actively promoting and training student peer mediators, mentors, student government members and school-wide monitors. At-risk students identified by teachers and the SEL team will each have a Mentor/advisor to support and counsel them throughout the school year. All stakeholders NYC School Survey July 2018 School Leaders, teacher leaders, Community school director, counselors,Dean Students Math and ELA proficiency Sept 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Student Support Team, Guidance Counselor.Dean Students Math and ELA proficiency October 2018-June 2019 Dean, Community Schools Director, & SEL team., indicators on the NYC School Survey Decrease in level of infractions by students Improvement in positive responses for Supportive Environment indicators on the NYC School Survey Reduction in the number of infractions Increase in positive social behaviour among students Students on the worry list ELA and Math proficiency September 2018- June 2019 Mentors, SEL Team, Mentors from the Leadership Program Reduction in infractions by at risk students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  The SEL Team (rising Ground social workers,school counselor,dean) will run the Dolphin Buck store where students will shop weekly and cash in their Better Bucks. The school will utilize data such as the number of Better Bucks students receive per class ,the number of incidents entered into OORS to continue to develop and evaluate the PBIS program to address the social and emotional needs of students. SEL team will communicate regularly with families about SEL classroom activities (PDs) to encourage reinforcment of SEL lessons at home. Students Math and ELA proficiency October 2018- June 2019 Social Emotional Team - guidance counsellors,Community school director,administrators, dean Increased positive social behaviour Students and families Attendance September 2018 - June 2019 Parent coordinator, SEL Team, administrators Reduction in level of infractions among students 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use designated Family Engagement time such as Family Night, Tuesday Parent Engagement, Parent Teacher Conferences, etc. as well as school-generated opportunities (awards ceremonies, performances) to inform families about expectations for students. This includes common core learning standards, grading policies, assessments, the use of assessment results to provide students with individualized, targeted support, and ways parents can support their child's learning at home. Key personnel will include everyone, that is from administration, to teaching staff, to parent coordinator, to CBO's to counseling team. These activities will span from the first day of school to the last. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds will be utilized to contract with The Leadership Rise program to provide mentoring to students and teacher professional development. Guidance Counselor and Social Workers will provide appropriate consequences and support. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019 the Social Emotional Team will create and implement a student survey similar to that of the Safety Measure of the Supportive Environment element of the NYC Survey to show a 15% increase with student support. By February 2019 Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS) data will indicate a 15% decrease in level 4 and 5 infractions. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. referrals, OORS data, survey to be completed by students Progress monitoring update: Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths: Teachers actively participate in targeted cycles of professional development aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching and informed by teacher and student data. Through structured instructional rounds teacher teams set goals for improving instruction and measure growth based on the instructional rounds data and Teacher Development and Advance Data. Teacher teams meet weekly and utilize protocols to analyze student work and data. Areas of Need: The 2018 Quality Review recommended: 2.2 Assessment: Feedback to students as well as instructional adjustments to lessons in order to meet the learning needs of all students are inconsistent and uneven.    Feedback many times was not explicit and clear and failed to give specific next skills on which the student needed to work. In some classrooms visited, in-the-moment adjustments based on collected student responses were not fully implemented. Feedback on some work products was not clear. Overall, student work does not provide specific enough details to support further improvement. (Priority Need) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Collaborative teaching begins with a shared understanding of how students learn best. At I.S. 217 we believe that students learn best in a nurturing environment that encourages them to be creative and use critical thinking skills that are explicitly modeled and scaffolded. To this end, teachers meet daily for common planning to analyze student work using protocols, review data, and engage in lesson plan studies to inform instruction. Teachers also use the data and noticings from these sessions to modify curriculum and unit plans. We also collaborative teaching as analyzing student work in teams, reviewing lessons (lesson study), as these will allow us to review our own practices and make the necessary adjustments to improve. We also see collaborative teaching in the form of intervisitations; a process in which we learn from our own best practices and consult colleagues for support and feedback. Our goal is for teachers to be their own best resource. In doing so we create a community of professional learning that we can tap into for our own professional development. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The school Instructional Cabinet will collaborate to determine our school’s professional development needs based on Advance data, goals teachers set during End of Year Conferences, and data collected through Instructional Rounds. By focusing on these high-leverage items we expect to improve student learning by improving teacher practice. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher Teams will use protocols to analyze data and student work to make effective adjustments to the curriculum and unit plans, provide differentiation for ENL students and SWDs, and identify specific instructional strategies/interventions to meet the needs of all students. All teacher teams will also collaborate to revise curriculum in order to ensure proper vertical and horizontal alignment, incorporation of the instructional shifts , level of rigor and adaptations to also meet the needs of ENL students and SWDs. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? We expect to align key units of study in ELA (argument and information) to social studies in order to consolidate and deepen student understanding. Teachers will be able to share resources such as standards-based checklists and rubrics, and share findings to adjust instruction and increase student learning. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent Benchmark and Interim Assessment Data, iReady data measure student achievement; identify patterns; determine student mastery of standards; identify strengths and weaknesses , plan differentiated tasks for students and to determine goals for each child Advance determine instructional areas in need of improvement for teachers and plan differentiated professional development sessions to build their capacity unit assessments identify students' progress, strengths and weaknesses to provide targeted support Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, teacher teams will consistently utilize the inquiry process to analyze formative assessment data (bi-weekly assessments, culminating tasks and iReady assessments) to regularly group and regroup students and provide targeted support within those groups, which will result in an increase of at least 5% in student proficiency on iReady diagnostic assessments. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average Proficiency in Math Average Proficiency in ELA 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Proficiency in Math and ELA Sept 2018 School administrators , coaches and teachers. Teachers Proficiency in ELA and math August 2018 School administrators,teachers,coaches How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increased collaboration among team members Increase in students' performance on unit assessments Teachers Proficiency in Math and ELA September 2018 -June 2019 Teachers, coaches and Supervisors will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the activities and strategies. Increase in students' performance on unit assessments Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Clear systems ,structures and protocols for communicating the work , goals and progress of the teacher teams will be established.Each team will have a google doc page for minutes,agendas and resources Professional development on the Inquiry process. Pushables Level 1 and 2's identified in math and ELA and the targeted inquiry skills for Math and ELA across each grade level Teacher schedule will include 45 minutes for each teacher team to meet daily .During each meeting, norms will be established ,.Teacher teams will utilize protocols for looking at students' work and students' data to gather information about students' learning,inform 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  instructional units,make adjustments to the curriculum ,revise lessons and tasks. Teachers will utilise IIready data, end of unit assessment to identify students' strengths and weaknesses to adapt curriculum and instruction as appropriate Teacher teams will identify target skills/ trends , develop pre and post tests,plan lessons,share strategies and plan next steps for their students Teachers will conference with students and communicate goals indicating their next steps and the time-frame within which to achieve these goals.These goals will be posted in the classrooms Teachers Proficiency in ELA and Math October 2018- June 2019 Teachers, coaches, consultants,administration Students Proficiency in math and ELA September 2018- June 2019 Administration,teachers and coaches will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the activities /strategies. Teachers Proficiency in math and ELA October 2018- June 2019 School Leaders, coaches, consultant and teachers will be responsible for implementing and overseeing these activities. Increase in students' performance on formative assessments Increase in students' performance on assessments Informal and formal observations of teachers' practices 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use designated Family Engagement time such as Family Night, Tuesday Parent Engagement, Parent Teacher Conferences, etc. as well as school-generated opportunities (awards ceremonies, performances) to inform families about expectations for our teaching staff and our method of monitoring. This includes informal and formal observations, meetings, professional development sessions, etc. Key personnel will include administration and the teaching staff who will be constantly reminded to form positive relationships with families and students. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  We will use tax levy funds and Title I funds to implement the action plan items listed above. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a 7% increase of students who meet proficiency levels on the iReady and/or CCLS-aligned Data Tracker in ELA. There will also be a 5% increase of students who meet proficiency levels on the iReady and/or CCLS-aligned Data Tracker. This will be the result of Teacher Teams who will develop coherent CCLS-aligned tasks, activities, and assessments that meet the needs of all students. Progress Monitoring: In February 2019 review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Progress Up to date : Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure are the results from iReady and/or CCLS aligned ELA & Math interim assessments. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths relative to Framework & DTSDE Tenet: ● Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. The school leader has used student achievement data to implement structures and protocols that expand programs for additional learning time, and made effective use of available resources to meet the needs of the school community. (DTSDE Report p. 7, Tenet 2.3) ● The school leader has established a rigorous schedule of teacher observations, feedback, monitoring, and training that is aligned to the district’s Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR). (DTSDE Report p.7, Tenet 2.4) ● School leader provides differentiated professional learning opportunities based on educator's needs and observation data. Priority Needs The DTSDE Review report recommended: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  2.2 : Include all relevant stakeholders in establishing the SMART goals/mission for school improvement as well as formal protocols for monitoring the effectiveness of implementation activities. Communication should be regularly provided to all constituents regarding the vision and SMART goals clearly, regularly, and in an understandable way for all constituents. 2.5 : Prioritize and integrate the evidence-based structures used into a dynamic and comprehensive school-wide system in order to identify, plan and monitor interventions to meet the needs of every student, especially those in identified subgroups. AIR Co-Interpretation Key Finding: Staff would like administration to provide more clear, frequent and positive interpersonal communication and support in meeting instructional goals, student achievement goals and student social/emotional goals. Based on Survey results teachers also want more opportunities to take part in key decisions. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 1) The school leader will continue to articulate the shared vision and mission to the entire school community using a variety of methods. For example, the school leader will host breakfast meeting, lunches and workshops specifically dedicated to engaging all stakeholders in activities pertaining to the shared vision and mission. The CBO partner will be fully integrated into the school community and will attend all staff meetings, professional development sessions and retreats. In addition, the Community School’s Director will oversee a communication and progress monitoring system to ensure that the CBO and teachers collaborate to ensure that all students’ academic and social and emotional needs are being met. 2) The school leader will ensure that the school and individuals continue to improve by implementing a robust progress monitoring system that will track the progress towards school-wide goals and individual professional goals. This progress monitoring system will also track the impact of key initiatives and partnerships on student progress. The actual reports, graphs and charts will be completed by the school data specialist. The SLT and teacher teams will utilize protocols to review the progress reports on a monthly basis. 3) The school leader and teachers will utilize student achievement data (including diagnostics, screeners, report card grades, state exams and interim exam results) to identify appropriate interventions and enrichment opportunities for all students. All students will have at least 3 math intervention periods and 3 ELA intervention periods embedded into their schedules. During this time students will be matched with instruction that meets their individual needs. Resources from the SIF grant will be used to hire a math consultant (NTN) to provide math content knowledge to teachers and coaching to improve instructional practices in Math. 4) As discussed more fully in the Action Plan below, school leaders will conduct short frequent cycles of observations and provide feedback to teachers within 1 week. By May 2019, school leaders will conduct a minimum of 5 classroom observations per teacher using the 2013 version of the Danielson Frameworks for Teaching and the Advance Tracking System, and provide teachers with feedback, resources, and professional development to improve their instructional practices. Each administrator will conduct a minimum of 6 observations per week. (SOP 2.4) 5) The school will utilize the existing Skedula system to generate bi-weekly reports on students grades, social emotional development and academics so that all partners have shared accountability for student achievement. The newly 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  identified/hired data specialist will be primarily responsible for ensuring that all reports are generated and circulated in timely fashion. The reports and progress towards goals will be discussed during all Partnership Meetings. 6) The Assistant Principal will primarily focus on building teachers instructional capacity through classroom observations, and supervising specific department and team meetings. Specific department and grade-level supervision assignments will be based on the leaders areas of strength and areas for growth. The Community School Director will be responsible for ensuring that all Partnerships are cohesive and coherent and align to the schools vision, mission and core values. The Community School Director will also ensure that there are appropriate systems and structures in place to identify the individual needs of students and to match them with appropriate resources and services. 7) The Principal will create a Model classroom to be used as a site for teachers to visit and identify areas within the room to promote students' independence in their classrooms ( for eg,. anchor charts, word walls, etc) On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? Better align teacher observations to the school's goal for improvement and the instructional focus to improve teacher practice. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? The school administration will continue to articulate the shared vision and mission to the entire school community using a variety of methods. For example, the school leader will professional development sessions where the entire school community will be engaged in workshops dedicated to formulating coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best using the instructional shifts in Math and ELA and the Danielson Framework for teaching. The school's goal, mission and instructional focus will be posted throughout the building The CBO partner will be fully integrated into the school community and will attend all staff meetings, professional development sessions and retreats. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Teacher leaders will be selected for each content area.They will meet once per month and engage in creating systems and structures to promote development of common assessments, analysis of the assessment data analysis . During their weekly team meetings,they will facilitate the teacher team meetings utilising protocols for analysing students' work , the data and reflecting on their instructional practices together using videos of their classroom practices. To build teachers' capacity,teachers will conduct inter-visitations among themselves and then debrief with each other identifying their next steps. Assistant Principal, coaches and consultants will support the teacher leaders at the meetings The Assistant Principal will primarily focus on building teachers instructional capacity through classroom observations, and supervising specific department and team meetings. Specific department and grade-level supervision assignments 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  will be based on the leaders areas of strength and areas for growth. The Community School Director will be responsible for ensuring that all Partnerships are cohesive and coherent and align to the schools vision, mission and core values. The Community School Director will also ensure that there are appropriate systems and structures in place to identify the individual needs of students and to match them with appropriate resources and services. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? A shared collaborative decision making model will be strengthened within the school.The Instructional Cabinet will be extended to include Principal, assistant principals, teacher leader, parent coordinator , the IEP coordinator, the Community school director, and Rising Ground Lead Clinician. This team will meet once per week to discuss and engage in planning that covers the entire spectrum of school activities for eg. a) effectiveness of programs and impact on students' learning b) ongoing analysis of students' data and effect of instructional practices on results c) identifying professional development based on teachers' needs. School administrators, parent coordinators and the community school director will collaborate with the community through outreach programmes.Teachers will schedule to meet with at least three parents per week How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Cycles of Advance observations will begin every 6 weeks and equally distributed amongprincipal and assistant principals. Teachers will be provided with their Advance observation reports within five school days. For informal class visits done by administration, teachers will be provided with their feedback indicating strengths and area for improvement within 24 hours. Prior to each observation cycle, the school administration will do a walk-throughtogether , using the DanielsonRubric and calibrate among themselves to ensure consistency in rating.At the end of each walk-through, a debrief session will follow comparing ratings and reviewing evidences for each component of the Danielsonrubric. Informal observations will be conducted daily. Feedback from Advance and informal observations will be recorded in the Performance Management system and support provided to teachers will be provided through intervisitations, articles,one and one coaching ,support from consultants and differentiated professional development sessions 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Results of monthly unit assessment, interim assessments - iReady data, Advance data Teachers will regularly review data to identify strengths and weaknesses,make curricula adjustments and differentiate tasks Administrators will use data to provide teachers with ongoing feedback and targeted professional support Teachers, coaches,administrators Teachers and administrators How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? There will be scheduled time for daily teacher team meetings. Students' schedule will allow for small group instruction for targeted groups of students. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, teachers will use a data analysis protocol to uniformly interpret multiple data points and make appropriate adjustments to instructional plans in order to support students which will result in a 5% increase in student proficiency in ELA and math. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Average Proficiency in Math Average Proficiency in ELA 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. By September 2018, School Leaders will organize and facilitate a whole staff full- day professional development workshop to (review) , 2018-2019 goals, school's instructional focus and Domain 1e, 3B and 3D. A full year PD calendar will be created based on review of teacher and student data,instructional focus, school wide goals and the school's instructional focus. Professional development activities will be based on the analysis of the results of informal observations and observations in the Advance system Administrators will provide all teachers written feedback regarding each observation and will log all feedback into an on-line system. (PMS). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Math and ELA proficiency All staff members, CBO partners, and consultants. August 2018-September 2018 School Leadership, Engaging Schools, and Community Schools Director.teachers, administrators., Improvement in instructional practices related to 1E ,3B and 3D Teachers Math and ELA proficency October 2018- June 2019 Administration, teachers, coaches, consultants, Strengthening of teachers' practices Teachers Math and ELA proficiency October 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, coaches, consultants, New teacher mentor, consultants, Strengthening of teachers' practices school leaders participation in Teacher development and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50 evaluation clinics offered by the District Administrators will utilize a uniform format to provide teachers with feedback which will include Specific and evidenced based facts,Actionable next steps, resources, time-frame for completion and time-frame for follow-up( within two weeks). Feedback will be provided within 48 hours of observation 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will use designated Family Engagement time such as Family Night, Tuesday Parent Engagement, Parent Teacher Conferences, etc. as well as school-generated opportunities (awards ceremonies, performances) to inform families about expectations for students. This includes common core learning standards, grading policies, assessments, the use of assessment results to provide students with individualized, targeted support, and ways parents can support their child's learning at home. Key personnel will include everyone, that is from administration, to teaching staff, to parent coordinator, to CBO's to counseling team. Our goal is to help families understand that leadership is distributed in order to build capacity. To accentuate this point we will recruit parents for our SLT, CET, and other school activities and events. This process will span from the first day of school to the last. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Enrichment programs will be created to meet the academic needs of students in ELA and math. Saturday Academy   After School Tutoring: 2 times per week  Morning School: tutoring for 1 hour before school  Mid-Winter and Spring Break Academies: at least 3days a week during those school breaks Curriculum resources such as books and materials for the programs above. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School X Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. At the end of each 6 week cycle, administrators would have completed evaluation of all teachers and provide them with actionable next steps. Evidence of this support will be documented in the Performance Management System. The Performance Management System will also reflect daily feedback provided to teachers from administrators based on informal walkthroughs. By February 2019, administrators will use the Advance system data and teacher observations to determine teacher instructional progress as measured by a 3% increase in teachers moving from Developing to Effective in Danielson Framework for Teaching Domains 1e, 3b, and 3d. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Performance Management system, Advance data, evidence gathered from informal walk-throughs Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths : School community offers a variety of parent workshops and adult education courses such as ENL, Computer Literacy, Citizenship, Adolescent Development, and Common Core. In addition, the school hosts 25-30 minute parent teacher conferences at least 3 times per year so that parents are able to learn about their child’s strengths and areas for improvement. Parent Engagement Tuesdays are reserved for Parent Teacher Engagement Activities. One aspect of those activities is to prepare content area lessons for parents on each grade level. The lessons focus on current units of study, especially the concepts that present a challenge for students. Teachers include practical suggestions for parents to support school learning at home. Finally, the school has a core group of parents who can be trained to mentor and implement outreach efforts to families. This is supported by the Community Outreach Specialist, Lead CBO and Parent Coordinator. In addition, the Lead CBO social worker is always available to families to discuss concerns related to mental health, development, and any other factors that impact students' success inside and outside of the classroom. Needs : 6.3: Include in the comprehensive plan for regular and effective communication to parents and families, adaptive mechanisms in multiple languages and modalities that will support parents and families to engage in all aspects of the school, and identify clear ways for the school to measure the effectiveness of its communication efforts with parents and make modifications as required. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  **Update: 6.4-Develop a plan to build the staff capacity and hold them accountable for increasing and sustaining quality partnerships with community and families to support student learning and growth. Develop a plan to identify and implement strategies designed to provide more guidance to parents on how to support their child’s learning. (Priority Need) **Update: Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? 1) As a community school the school lobby will be revitalized to exemplify the collaborations that exist between all schools on the campus and the community at large. A parent resource center will be established and will serve as a location that parents can go to use computers, access books and materials, and sign up for workshops. All school safety officers and staff will receive training on how to maintain a welcoming environment. 2) Families will view our community school as one of their first sources of support for any challenges that they are experiencing. They will feel comfortable reaching out to the parent coordinator, Rising Ground Social Worker, DOE family worker, school guidance counselor, or any other staff member as needed and expect that their concerns will be treated with respect and care. 3) The school provides support to families through a variety of means. The school actively partners with Community Based Organizations to empower parents and build their capacity to take an active role in their child’s education. Parents are educated on the school and city governance systems and structures. Parents serve as advocates and role models for the entire school community to ensure that all students are provided an quality education that enables them to attend the high school and colleges of their choice. 4) The school will continue with its Parent/Teacher Home Visit Project whereby teachers visit students homes in order to forge better relationships, learn about students’ strengths, and the families hopes and dreams for their child’s future. 5) Families will have access to student achievement and progress data on a daily basis. In addition, the DOE system parents will have access to PupilPath which includes student anecdotal, high school preparedness tracker, and course assignment grades. 6) Parents will have access to High School Equivalency , ENL, Citizenship, computer, resume writing and adult literacy classes. In addition, they will be provided with opportunities to attend parent support groups and adolescent development courses. 7) Our school community will actively engage in the Academic Parent Teacher Team Project in order build parents capacity to take a proactive role in their child's education. Parents will be provided training on grade level CCLS learning expectations and standards. They will be provided with the data for how students are performing on a key standard and will then set a goal for student progress. Finally, they will be taught how to use specific strategies to help their children at home. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54  Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Families will be welcomed to the school and made part of the school community by CBO and school staff. Various resources from the surrounding community will be brought to the school building to welcome and develop partnerships with families, as well as businesses, and community-based organizations. Administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety offices will be given the resources needed to foster a welcoming environment for families. Families concerns and perspectives will always be given value and treated with respect by all team members. School staff will approach conflicts in a solution based manner. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? There will be 1-2 family leaders to represent each class. These parents will also participate in decision making by attending the School Leadership Team and Parent Association Meetings. Families will have a full understanding of the school’s core values in order to help instill an appreciation for learning in their children. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The school will engage community and families by holding Family & Community Professional Development Workshops. Teachers will train families on what their children are learning by modeling their strategies connected to content topics. Teachers will also make parents aware of student learning and progress. (i.e. workshops, student led conferences, Academic Parent Teacher Training Teams.) Sessions will be provided to parents to improve their knowledge on accessing the iReady program. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Academic Parent Teacher Training Teams Family Support Groups Teachers train parents how to support their children academically We have learned that when schools provide social and emotional support, families learn how to take care of themselves so that they are able to take an active role in what their child is learning. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Families will meet with teachers during parent teachers' conferences and will be engaged in professional development relating to socialemotional learning Family partnerships with CBO: Families partner with our leading CBORising Ground to support student success by actively participating in decision making and volunteering. Families regularly meet 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  with Rising Ground Social Worker to discuss concerns, obtain additional support, and help plan for their student's success. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Rooms will be set aside to facilitatefamilies. (for example use of the Computer Lab so that families can access the IReadyprogram. The parent coordinator, Community Schools Director, and Rising Ground Social Worker all have dedicated private office space. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Our vision for the role of the school in providing access adult classes will include ENL,Citizenship classes, Computers and High School Equivalency Classes. We have partnered with the Bronx Adult Learning Center in the Bronx and have become the registration hub for our families and community to extend learning opportunities in adult education. Parents are registered and are tested bi-weekly. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? iReady (evaluation subject test), interim and benchmark assessments will be presented during parent teacher conferences and academic parent teach training team workshops. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school community will increase and sustain partnerships with families and provide more guidance on how they can better support their children at home as measured by an increase of at least 20% in parents' attendance to school functions and parent engagement sessions as evident on attendance sheets. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Continue the Parent Teacher Home Visit Project in order to complete at least 40 home visits before the end of the school year. Based on survey results, establish a year-long calendar of parent workshops and adult education courses and create a communication and publicity program that ensures that all parents are aware of offerings. Parents will be introduced to using researched based reading strategies in all content areas to improve comprehension and problem solving in math and ELA. Providing resources and technology where parents and teachers can communicate (newsletter, school calendar.This will include major concepts being learnt) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Attendance Teachers, Social Workers, Administrators Nov 2018-June 2019 School Leaders, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator Parents Students' attendance August 2018-June 2019 Parent coordinator, Community school director,teachers How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in attendance at parent workshops Increase in parents' attendance at workshops Parents Attendance October 2018- 2019 Parent coordinator, CBO director Increase in parent attendance at workshops 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57 Teachers and parents Attendance September 2018- June 2019 School personnel including teachers, administrators will oversee these activities. Increase in parent attendance Bi - monthly parent conferences -Teachers will schedule to meet with at least 3 parents per week. Translators will be available for families during Parent teacher conferences, PTA meetings and workshops, Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy, and Title I funds will be used to implement the Action Plan Items. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title I 1003(a) Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, at least 50 parents will have engaged in at least 2 workshops to improve knowledge and capacity to help students improve academically and grow socially and emotionally. Agendas, survey ,attendance, parents' reflection on the following: -What did I learn? - What would I like to see more of? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Participation has exceeded our benchmark for this school year. All meetings are very well attended. Parent Workshops' and meetings' attendance are tracked by sign in sheets and RSVP Forms, listing the subject of the workshop and held in conjunction with the Administration, Parents, Lead CBO, and Parent Coordinator. **Update on year to date progress family workshops with total parent participation: Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, each week all students will receive 5 additional hours of academic vocabulary, writing, math, and/or debate instruction that will result in all students improving by at least 10% on their ELA & Math State exam scores, and 12% of student attaining a level 3 or 4 on the on the ELA and Math state exam. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. Renewal ELT is extended to all students. This is an opportunity for students to practice and hone critical content area skills while also receiving arts instruction and and a life-skills program. Through the integration of the arts (dance, chorus, drumming) entrepreneurship, and content area enrichment on alternating days, students will engage in high interest activities and skill building simultaneously. Periodic performances and academic improvement will maintain student interest and enthusiasm in the ELT program. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60   Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? We utilize various quantitative and qualitative data sources to design ELT programs that integrate academics, enrichment and hands-on experiences for all students. Specifically, we utilize student survey and school survey data, the New York State Assessments results, and MOSL results. ELT will be offered at a variety of times: Tuesday-Friday (2:25-3:40)-Mandatory Academic Enrichment for all students; Tuesday-Thursday (4:00-5:00pm) offered by CBO partners SISDA; Saturdays (9:00am-12:00 Pm)-Academic Enrichment offered to all students. We will continue to revitalize our performing arts programs by filling performing arts teacher vacancies and forming strategic partnerships with arts organizations. On Tuesdays-Fridays teachers recruited from our school staff will provide 1 hour and 15 minutes of CCLS aligned instruction to all students. During this portion of the ELT the school community will build upon the success of the research based Word Generation program to offer students an opportunity to build academic vocabulary, write from sources, and debate relevant real world related issues. The Word Generation program incorporates the CCLS instructional shifts. Students will have an opportunity to compete in campus-wide intramural debates as well as city-wide debates. In addition, students will be offered the opportunity to participate in our Mock Trial program during this time. All ELT activities will provide opportunities for students to complete independent reading using materials of their own choosing in an effort to ins till a love of reading in all students. In addition, they will complete project based authentic tasks, which incorporate the CCLS instructional shifts. We currently offer Enrichment Activities on Monday-Friday after school and also on Saturdays. The programs are directed by the school administration as well as our CBO partners Rising Ground and Sports & Arts. In addition, a small percentage of our students are enrolled in the SISDA Beacon after school program, which is also located inside of our school. Through our 21st Century Community Learning Center grant we are able to provide opportunities for academic enrichment (including tutoring services) to help students, meet state and local standards in core subjects. There are also a broad array of additional services, programs and activities that develop youth through sports, art, music, and recreation programs. These include: cosmetology; music production; STEM projects, dance, soccer and basketball. Study Hall—which provides tutoring and homework help in all subject areas for all students, especially those identified as low-performing according to the data; Saturday Enrichment program which is also open to all students, especially those identified as low-performing according to the da We analyze data in order to identify areas of growth and interest for our students to place them in appropriate groups and activities. We offer hands on activities based on students’ interest and individualized computer based ELA and Math activities. Our ELT program contains several intersecting components that engage students and tap into various interests to provide the necessary growth both academically and socio-emotionally. The physical education component fosters health and wellness, as well as discipline and team work. Music Production uses students’ interest in music to reinforce the importance of mastery in core subjects such as ELA, math, science, and social studies. All teachers are certified in the content area of instruction they are providing. In addition, CBO partners are teamed with licensed teachers in that content area (i.e. Physical Education, Math, and/or Science Teachers who will be implementing the Word Generation and Debate program will receive professional development on how to effectively implement the program. Since our school has been using the Word Generation Program for the past few years, the PD will be a refresher course for much of the staff. We will also include the CBO partners. In addition, the school will 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  be providing professional development on our school-wide guided discipline and student support program, school rules, and core values to all CBO staff members. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. The key personnel for implementing the program will be Principal Williams, Assistant Principal Knight, Community Schools Director and the SISDA Program Director. The School Administrators will oversee the instructional design and supervision of teachers and staff. The Sports and Arts Director as well as the Community Schools Director, in consultation and collaboration with the school leaders will monitor the implementation of the enrichment programs provided by the CBO partners. The impact of the program will be measured by student report card grades, interim assessment performance and discipline referrals. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The ELT program will be implemented from September 5, 2018-June 26, 2019 from the first day of school to the last day of school. Our lead CBO Rising Ground will be with us from start to finish. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Renewal School ELT Funds and Community School Lead Partner Contract Funds will be used to implement the ELT program. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks The impact of the program will be measured by student course grades, performance on interim assessments and attendance. The data specialist / testing coordinator will be primarily responsible for generating the reports and charts measuring progress. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  Results on unit assessments, I-Ready assessments and other formative assessments Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the Community School partner will implement programs to support the academic and social emotional growth of each student and increase parent engagement that will result in a 5% increase in attendance. By June 2019, the Community School partner will implement programs to support parent engagement that will result in 100 grade 6 parents attending workshops regarding instruction and/or social and emotional growth. By June 2019, there will be a 15% decrease in level 4 and 5 infractions based on the social-emotional support that is provided by the Community School partner. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? Implement Community School Model Average Proficiency in ELA Average Proficiency in Math Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Rising Ground At-Risk Students Mental Health, student activities, attendance monitoring, parent engagement, and supporting Extended Learning Time (ELT) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  2. 3. 4. Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The Community School Director and the Lead Clinician will be an integral part of the Principal’s leadership cabinet and will attend all school leadership meetings as well as weekly meetings with the Principal. As an important member of the leadership cabinet much of July will be spent providing the Community School Director with both quantitative and qualitative data regarding the school so that they can complete a thorough needs and asset assessment. The completed needs assessment will lead to the identification and implementation of goals. An Implementation Team will be established (students, parents, school leadership team, and lead CBO, and others) and will develop a plan that details how goals will be achieved with established target deadlines. Finally, the implementation team will meet on a regular consistent bases throughout the year to review, evaluate, assess progress, and update/ amend plan as team proceeds. In collaboration with the Rising Ground staff and school based support team, the specific strengths and needs of each student will be identified through their school performance, assessment data and feedback from teachers and guidance counselor. Based on this, students will be matched with specific enrichment opportunities and mental health services. For students who are extremely at risk we will utilize the Family Team Conferencing (FTC) process. Through this process the students’ parents, teacher, counselor, and others (choices of student/parent) , meet to discuss the child’s progress and develop a plan for the child success . From the FTC or other individualized meeting a specific plan for each student can be outlined and implemented. This will include Educational programs-book club, math and science workshops, tutorial services and intervention programs. Other possible programming will include – mental health (individual / group therapy), mentoring, youth development skills training, PBIS, arts & music program, performing arts – drama and production. In close coordination with the Parent Coordinator and PA, the Community School Director will develop a parent engagement action plan for the entire year. This plan will include a communication and publicity campaign designed to maximize the number of parents who attend school events. It will also involve formal surveys of parents to identify parents needs and barriers to participation. We will also continue with our home visit project to build relationships with parents. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students The key personnel who will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the Community School program will be the Principal, Assistant Principal, and Community Schools Coordinator. There will be several Community Partners for our joint ELT program including SISDA Beacon and Robotics Program. The programs will be offered to students based on students’ needs. The impact of the program will be measured by student course grades, performance on interim assessments and attendance. The data specialist/testing coordinator will be primarily responsible for generating the reports and charts measuring progress. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Additional School Aides will be of use to help manage students and programming. In addition, to the Community School Director, the school and partner Rising Ground will consider hiring an Expanded Learning Director to arrange programming and ensure alignment to school day program. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The Community School Director was hired in 2015. All programs from the initial needs assessment and action plan have been implemented since October 2016. Implementation is from the first day of school, September 5, 2018 through the last day of school, June 26, 2019. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Failed course and/or Level 1 on State ELA Exam; Bottom 10% on DRP diagnostic Failed course and/or Level 1 on State ELA Exam Science Failed course Social Studies Failed course At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As needed based on attendance, discipline referrals, classroom anecdotals, and student and/or family request. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) 1:1, small group tutoring During school, after school, Saturdays 1:1, small group tutoring During School, after school, Saturdays small group small group After school and Saturday, After school and Saturday,ELTtime 1:1, small group During School Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) , I-Ready, CCLS aligned reading and writing projects On-line learning I-Ready & performance series; CCLS aligned math problems and projects CCLS aligned Content Area Reading Projects and Writing Assignments CCLS aligned Content Area Reading Projects and Writing Assignments Group and 1-1 counseling by Guidance Counselor and Rising Ground Social Worker. 67  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. - Purchase basic/ emergency supplies such as book bags, uniforms, and various school supplies. - Individual Counseling services through CBO Rising Ground -Parent workshops: Adult education, domestic violence,employment,permanent housing,medical insurance,importation and deportation,high school and college readiness,,parent rights -NYC care coats for the families -Parent journey -book clubs -health fairs -hygiene kits/emergency supplies - Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). For the school year 2018- 2019, I.S. 217’s total STH families is 69. not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 68  not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. not applicable 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. I.S. 217 uses a variety of strategies for staff recruitment, retention, assignments, and support. We solicit resumes utilizing various DOE sponsored programs such as Open Market,Early hiring initiative, New Teacher Finder, and the New York City Teaching Fellows Program. We attend numerous DOE job fairs and we also work closely with the Office of Teacher Recruitment and Quality to recruit qualified teachers. While the Open Market and other DOE sponsored aids have been utilized, one key to recruitment has been ongoing networking by all staff. Finally, we rely upon effective staff members to refer former colleagues. We have a hiring committee that consists of teachers and administrators and we conduct rigorous behavioral based interviews, with the belief that the best predictor of past performance is future performance. All potential teachers are required to submit lesson plans and to teach demonstration lessons. Finally, we contact references prior to hiring new staff members. The retention of effective and highly qualified staff members is a strong area of focus and the administration works closely with the entire school community to ensure that all staff members feel supported and are given opportunities to grow as professionals. In addition, close attention is paid to school tone, culture, and morale. All teaching assignments are carefully monitored to ensure that teachers are placed in positions where they can have the greatest impact on student learning and achievement. As described below, all teachers participate in high quality professional development. In addition, all new teachers receive a full-time mentor who splits time between our school and a campus neighbor. The mentor is part of the District 12 New Teacher Center Mentoring Program which is geared to provide new educators, their mentors, and administrators with support and resources for instructional coaching to increase teacher retention. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have a robust professional development program, which includes workshops, job-embedded coaching, visits to high-performing schools and outside professional development workshops. The goal of all professional development is to provide teachers with the knowledge, skills and professional mindset necessary to accelerate learning for all students and to ensure that all students are progressing towards or meeting the CCLS. Professional Development is presented in cycles and topics are chosen based on classroom observations and student achievement data. Teachers are also encouraged to actively seek out professional development opportunities and the school funds them when possible. Professional Development is also provided through weekly 90 minute Department Professional Learning Teams and teachers participate in lesson studies, inquiry projects, analysis of student work, and data analysis. The 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  effectiveness of professional development is monitored and analyzed on a regular basis to quantify the impact on professional practice as well as the impact on student learning. Our mentor, principal and assistant principals receive a series of PDs, some in two day sessions, through the District 12 New Teacher Center Mentoring Program which provides mentors and administrators with tools and resources to adequately support and coach new teachers to increase teacher retention. Based on the current teacher observation data and student achievement, 75% of teachers need additional training in Designing Coherent Instruction and Engaging Students in Learning in order to ensure that all learning tasks are rigorous and provide appropriate supports and scaffolds for groups of students. In addition, 75% of teachers need to further develop in the area of Establishing a Culture for Learning in order to consistently convey the importance of the content and hold students accountable for high levels of learning and achievement. Finally, 80% of teachers need additional training in consistently including formative assessments in their lessons and providing students with targeted specific feedback. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our staff participates in subject area professional learning teams on a weekly basis and during these meetings assessments are selected, refined and analyzed. In addition, a team of teachers met during the first few weeks of school to select baseline and summative assessments in the core subject areas for the purposes of implementing the MOSL portion of the Advance Teacher Evaluation System. All teachers receive on-going professional development on the use of data to drive instruction. The teams utilize protocols and data analysis templates to efficiently organize 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  data and plan interventions, supports, and enrichment for groups of students based on the data. In addition the data is utilized to adjust unit plans and curriculum maps. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 332,390.00 66, 156 0 11,200.00 0 2,430,528.00 X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A,5B,5C, 5D, & 5E Part 4 and Part 5B; Section 6. Section 5A,5B,5C, 5D, & 5E Part 4 and Part 5B; Section 6. Section 5A,5B,5C, 5D, & 5E Part 4 and Part 5B; Section 6. Section 5A,5B,5C, 5D, & 5E Part 4 and Part 5B; Section 6. 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 217 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. I.S. 217 will support parents and families of Title I students and ensure that we: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● maintain an on-line grade book and website and encourage parents to review students’ progress weekly. ● conduct workshops on parenting, child development, stress management, and peace in the family ● providing materials and workshops to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  ● Parent Teacher Home Visit Project (PTHVP) pilot program designed to build relationships with parents and encourage involvement in school activities. ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● opportunities for parents to participate in a book club. ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under theEvery Student Succeeds Act.ring meetings and events as needed; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; School of Performing Arts 12x217 School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) I.S. 217 in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences three times a year during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed. ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences and Parent Workshops ● access to on-line grade books so that parents can monitor their child’s academic progress. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 30 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: I.S. 217 currently operates a freestanding ESL program throughout the day. We primarily utilize a push-in model, with several pull-out classes per grade each week. Our "entering" English Language Learners need additional support in order to enhance their language acquisition and literacy skills. To that end, we have begun a supplemental Saturday Program focusing on our Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ENL students as they have the greatest need for English support in the four skill areas. That combined group totals 20 students. An important part of our Saturday program will focus on providing our Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ELLs with enriched language acquisition services from an ENL and/or bilingual certified teacher. While most of the instruction will be provided in English, teachers will strategically use Spanish where applicable to enhance student learning. As per 2017-2018 NYSESLAT, Spanish LAB and NYSITELL data, this upcoming school year we will have 64 English Language Learners at the following performance levels: 32 Expanding; 6 Transitioning; 2 Emerging and 12 Entering. Students will be grouped by age/grade level and according to the new NYSESLAT Performance Levels, Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning. Each teacher will be responsible for a maximum of 10 students. Proficiency levels are spread throughout our 6-8 grade band, therefore Saturday Academy is an excellent opportunity for students to interact, learn with, and learn from peers at the same and higher proficiency levels. Teachers will be able to form grade level, heterogeneous, and/or homogeneous instructional groups that may not be possible otherwise. The Saturday Academy will operate from November 3, 2018 through May 4, 2019, for a total of 23 sessions. The instructional hours are from 9am to 12 noon for 2 teachers. Materials needed for the program include notebooks, workbooks, NYSESLAT preparation materials, and interactive educational software. The Saturday Academy program is focused on moving our beginner students from newcomer and the beginner level to intermediate and advanced levels. Students will work on oral skills as well as reading and writing. Our teachers adapted our ELA curriculum by creating lessons and activities for newcomers in order to meet the needs of our beginner students and assist them in acquiring oral and written skills in English. There will also be a focus on vocabulary instruction as a means to enhance students' overall English proficiency. Our coach from RBRN-NYU will assist us in analyzing student assessment data in order to identify and purchase additional resources matched to our students' needs. The teachers who are assisting with our ELLs in the Saturday Academy, are bilingual ENL certified teachers. They are well qualified and work with our ELLs on a regular basis. This is a strong teaching team fully able to provide the necessary resources to our ELL students, especially to our beginner and newcomer students in our Saturday Program. These teachers will be working and planning together for the duration of the program. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The teachers and teaching assistants will receive professional development from outside ELL professionals. The training and professional development takes place during the school day. Our partner from RBRN-NYU, Joseph Archangelo will assist in providing PD. He will specifically provide support to content area teachers (social studies, science, and math) through planning sessions and in-classroom coaching. Mr. Archangelo will be tentatively working with the content area teachers from November 2018 through May 2019. The PD schedule for I.S. 217 began in September and will run through May 2019. The professional development will be provided for our entire teaching staff and will be held during some Monday PD sessions and off campus if provided. We will partner with our co-located school X384 who has more experienced ENL providers and also a bilingual program to serve ELLs. The PD sessions will be included in our regular Monday PD sessions and will rotate among the other topics that are offered within our school community. ELL focused topics will be offered to our entire staff on a monthly basis, on Mondays, 2:25 pm to 3:45 pm. Based on feedback during recent N.Y.S. DTSDE reviews, Classroom Observations, and ELL assessment data all teachers could benefit from additional Professional Development. Topics will include: October/November: Include ELL strategies in our CCLS aligned curriculum and language objectives as well within our lessons. Implement specific instructional strategies for our Entering and Emerging ELLs. Teachers involved in the Title III program will also receive on and off-site PD from our NYU Language RBERN Coach which will include: supporting Entering/Emerging students with literacy skills; vocabulary development, and co-teaching, to name a few. November: The ELL Identification and initial enrollment process in NYC and the results at I.S. 217; December: Assessing the needs of our ELL Students with a focus on understanding and serving our Entering and Emerging ELLs January: Reviewing all ELL data and using it to inform instruction, especially our Entering and Emerging students February: Our ELL students in core subject classes - how can we differentiate and add to their understanding? March: looking forward to the State Exams - what will they mean for our ELLs; how do ELLs need to prepare? April: Looking forward to the NYSESLAT - what will this exam mean for our ELLs; what do they need to do to be prepared? May: NYSESLAT Testing - what it entails, schedules, grouping, 4 modules; Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities topics to be covered   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Each of the events listed below are designed to build parents' capacity to take an active role in their child's education and to keep them informed of the standards that their child needs to master in order to become college & career ready. These workshops provide an opportunity for parents of ELLs to work with an ELL expert as part of the agenda. Staffing for these parent activities will include our TESOL certified Teacher as well as our Saturday Academy Teachers. Parents will be notified by phone calls, our newsletter, flyers, letters home, and through our website. All notifications will be made in English and Spanish. 1. Title III Information Session for Parents Rationale: Parents will be informed about the goals, structure and purpose of the Title III program for their child. Parents will also participate in hands-on educational activities that they can complete with their children at home in order to accelerate student achievement. Provider: ENL Teacher Date-September 26, 2018 - Prior to the start of the program 2. State Exam Information Session for Parents and students Rationale: Parents and students will understand the components and demands of the NYS. Exams in ELA and Math to be given in April. They will be informed of their child's progress in these 2 key subject areas. In addition, parents will have an opportunity to engage in activities that they use at home with their children in order to accelerate student achievement. Provider: ENL Teacher Date-October 24, 2018 and March 13, 2019 3. NYSESLAT Information Session for Parents Rationale: Parents will understand the components and demands of the NYSESLAT exam for their child. They will be informed of the progress their child has made on the NYSESLAT and the expectations. The workshop will include activities that the parents can use at home to support their child's academic development. Provider: ENL Teacher Date-March 13, 2019 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 12 School Name IS 217 - School of Performing Arts School Number 217 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dionne Williams Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Brian Jones Teacher/Subject Area Sarah Hoppes-Rizzo Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider George Roberts Superintendent Rafaela Espinal Assistant Principal Bertram Knight Coach n/a School Counselor Xiomara Diaz Parent Kathy Jimenez Parent Coordinator Julia Ortiz Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 288 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87 Total number of ELLs 62 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.53%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 2 4 Lang. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Several formative and curriculum-embedded assessment tools are used to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data are used to group students according to level (Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding). Data from the State ELA and Math exams and iReady diagnostic data are used to place ELLs and all of our students into groups for SGI, or Small Group Instruction. During SGI students receive targeted instruction to improve their proficiency with reading and mathematics. Data from all assessments are incorporated into an evaluation of our ELLs. Thus far the data shows our ELL students are below grade level in reading and writing which is a key area of emphasis in our ELA and ENL curricula this year. We have added an additional 4-5 periods a week of both focused reading and writing instruction in order to address this need for our students. MSQI online reading tools will also be used as part of independent and guided reading instruction which provides personalized assessment data to guide instructional planning and improve student outcomes. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? iReady assessments are administered three times a year; Fall which serves as a benchmark in early October, a Winter assessment in January, and a Spring assessment in May. These assessments drive the Small Group Instruction groupings and content in terms of skills with which students need to improve proficiency. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our primary summative/baseline assessment is iReady in reading and math as this is administered three times a year. Within every unit of instruction in ELA, math, science, and social studies, students are given pre, mid, and post unit assessments to identify progress and areas of need. There are approximately three units of study per school year within each content area. We also administer the NYC ELA and Math Benchmark Assessments. These assessments help us to monitor progress for our ELLs, or lack thereof, by identifying and addressing areas of need. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? There are several structures in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered. The first is grouping according to iReady lexile levels which allows us to group students of similar need in small groups that receive targeted instruction during Small Group Instruction. The next structure is a Learning Path Tool which is used to analyze assessment data within every content area and contains the following information: performance levels--far below standard, approaching, meeting, and exceeding standard; examples of what students know and are able to do; and next steps along with SMART goals for each performance level and plan to differentiate instruction. The Learning Path Tool is used to form small groups within content area classes which creates yet another level of targeted instruction for all students and address the specific needs of groups such as ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses several data sources guide instruction for ELLs. The primary source documents is the NYSESLAT which provides each ELL students' proficiency level. We also administer iReady diagnostic assessments for reading and mathematics in the fall, winter, and spring. This data along with weekly math assessments and bi-weekly ELA assessments, paints a clear picture of where our ELLs are and the supports they need. Teachers differentiate tasks according to the skills indicated in the data. Our ELLs are all also programmed into small group instruction where they receive additional support from their ENL teachers based on the skills indicated in assessments. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our ELL programs are informed by NYSESLAT, ELA, and Math assessments. We also consult the EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool). The data shows that most of our ELL students initially move into this community as newcomers - to the country and to the language. As a result, they are less proficient in English and are behind in grade level in the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and in NYS Exams in ELA and Math, i.e. as a result of their initial lack of proficiency in English . Writing and reading instruction and math are key areas of emphasis for this year's ENL and overall curricula programming. To address these needs in writing and reading we will increase our focus on reading and writing instruction in order to address this need for our students. In addition to online tools and guided reading instruction, we utilize iReady reading diagnostic. Interactive notebooks will be implemented in all content areas as they tap into the multiple intelligences to help students make their own meaningful connections to the content. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Daily common planning time is the opportunity for our ENL teacher to meet with content area teachers to share assessment data and make instructional adjustments accordingly. The use of the previously mentioned Learning Path Tool is used by teachers to ananlyze assessment data for the class whereas the Foley Square is used to identify and provide supports for individual students. In addition, the ENL teacher who reviews EDAT and NYSESLAT data firsthand, specifically tracks students' language development and provides content area teachers with instructional strategies to improve student proficiency. The 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  ENL teacher periodically provides professional development to the entire staff to foster language development for ELLs in all content areas. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Most of our ELLs, with the exception of those in self-contained and ICT classess, are grouped together in the same class on each grade level with non ENL students. We have a push-in and pull-out program for Integrated ENL instruction. Push-in instruction for Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students take place in ELA primarily, but also includes math, science, and social studies. Additional pull-out instruction is provided to Entering ENL students during Small Group Instuction periods which were four times a week for the 6th grade and three times a week for the 7th and 8th grades, respectively. This model allows the ENL teacher to facilitate academic language development, reading comprehension skills, and writing skills within the grade level ELA class. In addition, the push-in model creates collaboration between the ENL and content area teacher which also allows the ENL teacher to identify areas for growth to target during their small group pull-out instruction. It also allows the ESL teachers to use pull out instruction to build background knowledge that can then be used in the content area classes to enhance student understanding. The ENL teacher meets daily with ELA and social studies grade level content area teachers that they push in with in order to analyze student work, share assessment data, adjust curriculum maps, and coordinate instructional plans. This year's ENL program pull-out program is heterogeneous in that groupings are students of mixed proficiency levels though in the same grade. Our ENL teacher divides the ELLs into groups based on proficiency levels: Entering/Beginner, Emerging/Low Intermediate, Transitioning/Intermediate, Expanding/Advanced, and Commanding/Proficient. Students are then programmed for the required number of ENL minutes of instruction in accordance with the English language requirements outlined in the Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154.2. In the ESL classroom all instruction is in English; however, the student’s use of the native language during activities that pair advanced students with beginners is not discouraged. Moreover, students are encouraged to build literacy skills in their native language. In addition to English books found in the leveled multicultural classroom library, books in other languages are available. A rich text environment complete with rotating word walls, anchor charts for discussion, vocabulary, and comprehension strategies reinforce teaching points that promote skills included in the ELA balanced literacy units of study. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Each ELL students' program is reviewed carefully by the ENL Coordinator to ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are met in accordance with CR Part 154. ELL students' programs are recorded including the precise days and periods that ENL instruction will take place. All ELLs are also programmed in STARS accordingly. The ENL teacher's schedule is also 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  reviewed by the school's administration to assure that the maximum number of minutes are dedicated to the teaching of our ELL students. Entering and Emerging level students receive 360 minutes of mandated instruction each week while Transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes. Commanding students receive 90 minutes of study. In addition, all ELL students receive targeted instruction up to 4 times a week during our one and 1/4 hour long extended day program. All classes are taught in English with necessary native language supports and scaffolds which includes laptops with native language translations. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English using ENL researched based strategies that are rigorous and serve to scaffold and differentiate learning among ELL students. I.S. 217 considers all teachers to be instructors of ELLs and to that end all teachers utilize the Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) to inform classroom instruction. This model allows teachers to plan and execute lessons that help students acquire academic language and content while becoming proficient in English. Teachers use a variety of Sheltered English Instructional strategies, including graphic organizers, modifying speech rate and tone, visuals, and relating content to students' background experience. ELLs will meet the demands of NYS Learning Standards through the rigorous instruction provided in the classrooms. Teacher lessons include Integrated language and content instruction to support language development for ELLs.There will also be increased opportunities for students to discuss content and problem-solve with peers which will build academic language along with content knowledge. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Since we have a freestanding ENL program, all assessments and evaluations are in English. The Spanish LAB is used to assess literacy in Spanish for new ELLs. For all state exams ELL students will have translated exams in their native language in addition to a version in English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. 6a. SIFE students are included in all intervention services through pull out and after school programs to address their specific needs. When needed they are provided with family counseling by the school social worker. SIFE students also meet regularly with the guidance counselor and are monitored by the RTI team. 6b. 6b. Newcomers are given targeted instruction in the afternoon tutorial program that occurs during our ELT, extended learning time program which is 75 minutes a day 3 times per week. 6c, d: For all such students, standards-aligned texts are used to prepare students for success in their content area classes. Differentiated activities are provided to individualize instruction based on proficiency level, to develop literacy skills through the use of comprehension strategies and higher order thinking. All teacher made materials (unit plans, lesson plans, readings and assignments) are within the framework of Content Based Instruction. These ELL students are required to take the ELA exam and are provided with the same rigorous common-core aligned instruction as non-ELL students. Instruction is differentiated and scaffolded to ensure that students are able to meet the required standards. Students are given quarterly interim assessments and the data is used to target the reading comprehension, writing, and listening skills that students need to develop. This data is utilized to design interventions and instructions both during the regular school day as well as during small group instruction, extended learning time, and after-school program. Accommodations are provided to all based on their status as ELLs or former ELLs. 6e. Our former ELL population is mainstreamed into our school-wide programs. At the same time, all such students are provided with added services (90 minutes), and support as noted above. In addition, all former ELLs continue to receive testing accommodations for 1-2 years. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL-SWDs are mainstreamed for ESL services and are seen via a push-in/pull-out model. All materials and curricula available to General-Education teachers is available and used by SWD teachers. Common planning (ELL-SpEd) is done regularly. IEPs are monitored and data is annually aggregated and analyzed to assure that ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates ENL instruction receive appropriate instruction. IEPs are reviewed by our Special Ed Dept and ENL coordinator to assure that the requirements of the IEP are adhered to. Technology continues to be an integral part of the classroom. iPads and laptops are used to provide many academic programs for our students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL teachers as well as SWD teachers facilitate academic language development, reading comprehension skills, and writing skills within their respective classes. In addition, the ENL teacher identifies areas for growth to target during any small group pull-out instruction. It also allows the ENL and SWD teachers to use pull-out instruction to build background knowledge that can then be used in the content area classes to enhance student understanding. This year the ENL teacher are meeting weekly with the grade level SWD teachers that they push in with in order to coordinate the plans for the upcoming week, align curriculum maps, and share student assessment information. With regards to least restrictive environment, all of our ELL students are placed in General Education classes unless specified otherwise by IEPs. Where necessary, in accordance with their IEPs, ELL-SWDs are placed in ICT classes based on grade level and ability. teachers as well as SWD teachers facilitate academic language development, reading comprehension skills, and writing skills within the SWD classes. In addition, the ESL teachers identify areas for growth to target during any small group pull-out instruction. It also allows the ESL and SWD teachers to use pull out instruction to build background knowledge that can then be used in the content area classes to enhance student understanding. This year the ESL teachers are meeting weekly with the grade level SWD teachers that they push in with in order to coordinate the plans for the upcoming week, align curriculum maps, and share student assessment information. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Certain targeted intervention programs are on the classroom's computers, such as MyOn leveled reading program and iReady along with vetted websites that are specifically for our ELLs. In addition, other programs including Word Generation and MSQI Reading are utilized for building vocabulary, advancing language skills, and enhancing prior knowledge. ELA Classrooms have leveled bilingual libraries and use of Smartboards with access to the Internet to expose our students to prior knowledge needed and visual support as well. iPad and Laptop carts are available for all ELA teachers to aid in instruction. In addition, the Spanish LAB-R is used to assess ELLs in their native language. That assessment provides the ENL teacher with an understanding of our Spanish-speaking students' prior knowledge and abilities in their native language. The Extended Day program at I.S. 217 is dedicated to Math and ELA instruction and the ELLs are grouped (by grade and level) for focused instruction in these areas.For Social Studies and Science, use of the Push-in model has enabled the ENL Department to target these subject areas for intervention and focused instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have begun to implement the iReady math and ELA diagnostic program and the MyOn leveled, electronic reading program across content areas. Additional programs are also being integrated into the school day through our SIF grant. We continue to evolve our Extended Day to provide programs and services to our ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  ELLs have even greater access to all school programs. They have unlimited access to all after-school programs, Dance and acting which have recently been added to our school's curriculum and music classes. But in addition, our ELLs have additional programs that are targeted to their needs. These include Extended Day and Sports and Arts programs, Saturday Academy which includes an ENL teacher, as well as an after school tutoring program, and holiday programs during mid-winter and spring breaks so that students have even greater access to all school programs. They have unlimited access to all after-school programs, Dance and acting which have recently been added to our school's curriculum and music classes. But in addition, our ELLs have additional programs that are targeted to their needs. These include Extended Day and Sports and Arts programs, Saturday Academy, as well as various after-school programs available at the school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials that we utilize are the follwing: Computer programs include iReady, MyOnand specificly vetted ENL and ELA online websites; in class materials include Word Generation, Kagan Activators, and the MSQI Reading Program. iPads are used by the ENL Dept. in conjunction with the pull out portion of the ENL Program. Classroom Libraries (for ELA & other subject areas have been updated to include a separate section of books in the student's native language where possible). Native language textbooks in Math Science and Social Studies are on hand for use in each content area. During ENL instruction student have access to laptops with Google translate to hear challenging words and phrases in their native language. Currently, native languages of our ENL students include Arabic, French, and Spanish. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Our 7th and 8th grade ENL students are also enrolled in our Spanish Language classes. In addition, scaffolds in native languages, mostly in Spanish, is being utilized across content areas. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. AAs stated above and in the charts, our ELL students are provided services in excess of requirements. Services are provided based upon student's age and level and grade. Our ENL staff and subject area teachers work closely to provide targeted and differentiated instructional services to our ELLs using the SIOP model for instruction. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The ENL team at our collocated school x384/Entrada Academy are more experienced and have been together longer. As such, we constantly use them as a resource in all matters regarding ENL instruction including planning, assessment, use of the EDAT for instructional adjustments, and especially planning and administration for the NYSESLAT. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Most of our ELLs are enrolled over the counter as they arrive into the country. In order to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the year, parents are invited to attend a school tour and an orientation on the educational and recreational services available for students and parents. During this time there is a discussion with parents on the instructional strategies, activities and programs being implemented to ensure that our ELL population meet standards and pass all required city and state assessments. Our in-house community based organization provides adult ENL classes for parents in the evening i to help parents improve their own English language skills to better support their children's learning. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish language courses are provided to our students in 7th and 8th grades. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93  c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. 1. Professional development is provided on and off-site for teachers that serve ELLs. Faculty will attend workshops to fulfill the required hours of ELL training at a minimum. In addition, strategies for working with ELLs are discussed during weekly Instructional Department Meetings. Through the workshops, the faculty have learned and will continue to learn how and implement strategies that support ELLs to enhance their oral and written communication skills. In addition, the strategies will be aligned to content area standards. In collaboration with the school's network personnel, the faculty will receive professional workshops that include topics such as: Implementing SIOP, Differentiation of Instruction, Aligning ENL instruction to content areas and Common Core, incorporating technology into instruction, analyzing student work, and the use of data to plan instruction. ENL teachers also participate in professional learning team meetings to discuss student work and best practices, as well as discuss ENL methodologies. ELL Coordinator meets with the coaches and non-ENL teachers regarding providing instruction to the ELLs, and ENL strategies. ESL teachers will also attend BETAC workshops which focus on ELL instruction and development, this will enhance the professional development of staff. We also support our staff with information on which high schools most of our students are interested in and are usually sent to so that they can take their students and visit these schools. In addition, we provide our staff with information about our feeder schools' instructional program, approximately how many ELLs we expect from these elementary schools as well as access to the students' records. Regularly scheduled and ongoing (Monthly) PDs are offered for all staff in school and outside which focus on our ELL population including CCLS issues, best practices and various aspects of ENL instruction for our regular (non-ESL Licensed) teachers. Approaches and strategies that support ELLs are studied, discussed and implemented and later evaluated. The ENL teacher provides periodic staff training which include strategies, intervisitations, activities with an emphasis on adapting instruction to meet the needs of ELLs. Content area instruction is done in consultation with the ENL teacher who regularly conferences with subject area teachers about their common students and share pertinent information in regards to their social and academic development and progress. We also receive ongoing ELL support from a Resource Specialist/Language RBE-RN from New York University. Non-pedagogic staff receive training on the ELL in-take process in order to understand for themselves the options and services available to incoming families and ELLs in general. Non-pedagogic staff are also privy to communications for the pedagogic staff and therefore remain informed about protocols, programs, and services to meet the needs of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Throughout the school year several of our Monday PD sessions are devoted to meeting the needs of ELLs. At other times our ELL teachers turnkey critical PDs they have received to the entire staff. Our ELL teachers attend a monthly ELL Liaison meeting where they receive professional development on all matters regarding ELL instruction. There is also a resource specialist from New York State RBE-RN assigned to us who provides in-school professional development on a monthly basis. His work includes instructional support for ELL teachers and professional development on ELL-related strategies for the entire staff. In addition, our ICT teams receive additional professional development on best practices for co-teaching strategies that integrate language and content instruction for ELLs. A record of ENL professional development attendance is kept by the ENL coordinator and the Assistant Principal. Agendas, attendance records, and materials for all PDs are kept by administration. Professional Development topics are rotated throughout the year and include ELL specific topics as required. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are offered multiple opportunities to meet about ELL programs, student status, and needs. Translation services are always offered, Spanish is easily provided and the other languages are provided as needed with staff or the translation Team. We also make use of the Translation & Interpretation Unit to communicate with families. During these and any meeting with parents, conversations center on data. Through the data we are able to explain the students' proficiency level, language development in all content areas, and ways to further support their child's language development. These individual meetings take place throughout the school year to keep parents informed about their child's progress especially as it relates to language development. Other workshops are scheduled through the Parent Coordinator that are specifically geared for the families of ELLs. Records pertaining to these meetings such as agendas, sign-in sheets, and other related materials are kept in the main office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are included in all parent activities, including Breakfast with the Principal, High School Information nights, Incoming Grade 6th Parent Information Night, Citizenship classes, Parent Support Groups, Parent Association Meetings, and monthly meetings with the Parent Coordinator. A survey is conducted every three months to screen parental needs and align workshops and activities to those needs. Staff is able to contact and work with the Translation and Interpretation Unit of the NYC Department of Education. We also have a special awards ceremony for ELLs to recognize their progress with language development. Records for these events, such as agendas, sigh-in sheets, and other related materials are maintained by the Parent Coordinator. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. I.S. 217 has teamed with Entrada Academy, a NYC Public Middle School co-located in our building to offer a bilingual Program. This new program is now being offered by Entrada Academy. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dionne Williams, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 96  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School of Performing Arts School DBN: X217 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dionne Willilams Title Principal Bertram Knight Assistant Principal Julia Ortiz Brian Jones Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Kathy Jimenez Parent Sarah Hoppes-Rizzo Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a n/a Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Xiomara Diaz School Counselor Rafaela Espinal n/a n/a n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 1/1/18 1/1/18 1/1/18 1/1/18 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 97  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X217 School Name: I.S. 217 S Superintendent: R The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Julia Ortiz Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Language and interpretation guides are placed in public areas of the school including the main entrance, main office and other areas where parents meet with staff. Language I.D. guides are used to determine which language the parent speaks, followed by a phone call to the language and interpretation unit that will assist in effective communication with all families. All staff in the main office, including the parent coordinator are bilingual English/Spanish. Most of our parent population is bilingual English/Spanish. The parent coordinator also provides parents with the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 and Parents' Bill of Rights during back to school orientation. Parents sign and confirm receipt of said documents. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 98 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 6 3 259 122 1.52 0.76 65.4 30.81 6 3 257 124 1.52 0.76 64.9 31.31 Arabic French English Spanish 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families -Calendar/bilingual English-Spanish, -Parent-Teacher Conferences -Monthly -After-school programs -4 times per year -Parent association and school leadership team meetings, -Special education and IEP meetings. -Periodically -Mass phone messages via phone messenger about upcoming meetings/notices/school closures etc. -Monthly plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written communications are translated from English to Spanish by school staff. In instances where there is uncertainty about a particular word or phrase the Translation Unit is contacted for their input. All documents that go home to parents are 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 99  -Periodically -Monthly created well in advance of the intended distribution date to allow for accuracy and proper translation. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school -Family Night -Parent-Teacher Conferences -September 7th -November 16th; February 26th, May 1st plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Our parents are primarily Spanish-speaking so we arrange for ample staff to be available to provide interpretation for parents. In the event that there is a parent who speaks a language other than English or Spanish, we use the Translations & Interpretation Unit hotline. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 100  Several members of our staff speak both English and Spanish, the primary languages spoken by our families. The few families who speak a language other than English are comfortable communicating verbally in English which allows us to effectively reach limited-proficient families in the even of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Initially, staff members are informed about language assistance services available to Limited English Speaking parents through professional developments at the beginning of the school year. Staff receive constant reminders about the Translation and Interpretation Unit in regards to making regular contact with parents. There are signs prominently posted in the main office and at the main entrance to inform all about the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are provided with all the above as part of the school culture. In addition, parents are given their rights, which includes language access, which are distributed during student orientation. Translated signage are prominently posted at the entrance and the main office to make parents aware of the language assistance services available Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys and meetings are mechanisms used at I.S. 217 to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services. Another mechanism used to gather feedback is during family visits to the school and phone calls. We use these opportunities to gather feedback on our provision of services in order to better meet the needs of families. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 101 
