 09X218 School Name: P.S./I.S. 218 RAFAEL HERNANDEZ DUAL LANGUAGE MAGNET SCHOOL Principal: SERGIO CACERES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Rafael Hernandez Dual Language School 320900010218 Kindergarten to Grade 8-Dual Language 1220 Gerard Avenue Bronx NY, 10452 School Number (DBN): 09X218 718 410 7230 Phone Number: 718-410-8933 Fax: Dr. Serge Cáceres scacere@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Dr. SergeCáceres Luisa Arias José Gutiérrez Luisa Arias Andrea Albarracín CarissaDelgado, DalvingGuzman KhalfaniMuwwakil Director Jamie Yellen District Information Geographical District: 09 Leticia Rosario-Rodríguez Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue, Bronx, NY 10456 Superintendent’s Office Address: LRosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: (718) 579-7143 ext. 1022 718-410-7017   FSC: 09 Executive Director’s Office Address: Field Support Center (FSC) JoséRuíz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. SergeCáceres Arias Luisa José Gutiérrez Patricia Joseph Andrea Albarracín CarissaDelgado DalvingGuzman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Jamie Yellen, Director CBO Representative, if applicable Laura Selby Luisa Arias Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AlondraMoro KarinaCampos Maria Rodriguez AntelmaEspejel DalvingGuzman CarissaDelgado KhalfaniMuwwakil Susan Mateo AntelmaEspejel Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The school mission statement centers around biliteracy, student-centered instruction, collaboration, community building, parental engagement, and preparing our students for a global society. Our theme is: “Building bilateral autonomous learners through student-centered instruction" translation in Spanish: "Desarrollando alumnos biletrados e independientes a través de la enseñanza centrado en el estudiante."   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Rafael Hernández Dual Language Magnet School , located on the South Bronx and bordering High Bridge, opened on September 1999. PS /IS 218 offers students language and cultural literacy in both English and Spanish in a public school setting. The ultimate goals of the school are to work towards an effective integration of the two cultures, prepare students to participate in a global economy, multicultural and polyglot society, and develop biliterate global citizens. The dual language curricula is seen as the basis for students to desarrollar (develop) the academic skills, content-knowledge and understanding, intellectual curiosity, creativity and aesthetic responses, critical awareness, cultural identity, civic responsibility, and moral fortitude needed to become well-educated and productive members of an increasingly global society. The Rafael Hernández Dual Language Magnet School’s philosophy is to empower students with a purposeful education and appropriate skills for an increasingly diverse, technological, multilingual and multicultural society. The education of each student is a cooperative effort among staff, children, parents and the community at large. Together, we will nurture the social, emotional, physical and intellectual growth of students, so that they can surpass academic standards and be caring and productive citizens involved in a world community that respects linguistic and cultural diversity. Structure of Dual Language Model Kindergarten through second grades, there is full implementation of the dual language model. Students receive instruction in English and Spanish on alternative days from a certified bilingual teacher. All classes follow the side-by-side model with the exception of the ICT classes which follow the Self-Contained Dual Language Model and also receive instruction in English and Spanish on alternative days from a teacher who has a special education bilingual certification and a general education bilingual teacher. The side-by-side model is when two teachers work with each class: one focuses on English instruction, the other on Spanish. There are approximately 25 students in each Kindergarten class and 30 in each First and Second-grade classes. In addition to the bilingual certified classroom teacher, each classroom also has balanced literacy libraries in both languages and ESL services. Alternative days of language immersion is needed in order for students to develop the necessary literacy foundation in both languages, i.e., English and Spanish, and is critical to the success of the Dual Language program at PS/IS 218. In grades third through fifth, the Dual Language model uses the 60/40 percent model with 70 percent of the instruction in English and 40 percent in Spanish. English Language Arts, College and Careers, technology, Music, physical education classes are all taught in English. Social Studies and Science is taught in Spanish and mathematics has three periods taught in English and two in Spanish. Art classes are taught in both languages by the art teacher. Additionally, students of grades third to fifth, receive ESL services as needed. This model is important to strengthen the English literacy, Common Core Learning Standards and Standardized state exams while also developing and strengthening the Spanish Language competency. Middle School grades six to eight, follow the 60/40 Dual Language Model as well. English Language Arts, Music, Health, Advisory and Physical Education is taught all in English. College and Careers and Art classes in all grades are taught in both languages to provide students with more opportunities to practice the oral component of both 0  languages. Mathematics has three periods taught in English and two in Spanish. Sixth-grade social studies are taught all in Spanish while seventh and 8th-grade social studies classes have a period in Spanish and two in English. Sixth and seventh-grade science have two periods in English and one in Spanish. Eighth-grade science is taught all in English and this year, ninth grade Living Environment will be taught in English and Spanish to provide students with an advanced program in science in both languages. Additionally, an ESL teacher supports middle school students using the push-in and pull-out model. Student Recruitment and Admissions The Rafael Hernández Dual Language Magnet School recruits students from the adjacent neighborhoods of District 9. It is a zoned-school sharing it with PS 114 only a few blocks away for grades K-5. Students are recruited through the distribution of flyers, the assistance of the CBO that is a collaborating partner of the school, DOE Elementary Directory, District 9 School Fairs, and by recommendation from parents whose children attend or attended the school. There is no language requirement for incoming Kindergarteners but parents have to agree to have their children educated in in English and Spanish, i.e., Dual Language program. After second grade, students are required to take a language proficiency exam in Spanish since PS/IS 218 has a screened program for language and by the second grades, students are already writing in Spanish. Since a foundation in both languages is critical for students to advance through the upper grades, PS/IS 218 is reluctant to accept students who are not already bilingual beyond second grade. Students who might need ESL support, may progress slowly at first and then rapidly. PS/IS 218 is very successful in preparing ESL students to score “Advanced” and “Proficient” in the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT). PS/IS 218 is part of the Middle School Choice where students throughout the city can apply for the middle school grades. Since we have a screened program for language, upper grades students are given a language competency exam. The school developed an admission’s rubric which has been approved by Central Enrollment to be used to determine incoming students’ language proficiency for middle school grades. Since we are a K-8 school, middle school seats are very limited. Instructional Strategies The Rafael Hernandez Dual Language Magnet school’s instructional beliefs center around the philosophy that students acquire a second language in the same way they acquire their first language. The school uses a variety of instructional strategies (i.e., ESL, Whole Language, Fundations, Etapas and Estrellita for K-2, Orton Gillingham in K-8) while integrating literacy in mathematics, science, social studies, art, music, health, physical education, advisory and College and Careers classes in both languages—English and Spanish. Another core belief is that as part of the instructional strategies teachers use to build the foundations of reading involves reading to and with students, to connect oral language (English and Spanish) to print. In our K-8 classrooms, teachers use the following activities to promote reading comprehension: Guided Reading, Read Aloud, Shared Reading, Paired Reading, and Independent Reading. In the lower grades, students build their literacy skills on what they already have learned in previous grades while upper grades, reinforce their reading skills using primarily Close Reading, annotation, and analysis Skills. Additionally, students employ other literacy skills such as graphic organizers, doing group projects, responding to literature in reading journals, giving oral presentations, research papers, and different types of classroom projects in both languages. The school’s instructional focus and use of the Danielson Framework for Teaching 1  ● The instructional focus of the school is to build bilateral, autonomous learners through student-centered instruction in both English and Spanish. ● To support the instructional focus, the school hires staff only with Bilingual Extension licenses to support the instructional focus. ● Curricula is purchased in both English and Spanish (except grades 6-8 English Language Arts in English). ● School announcements are conducted in English and Spanish. ● Teacher observation cycle is utilized to provide timely feedback aligned with an internal school calendar adhered to by Principal and three instructional Assistant Principals. ● Observations are conducted in English and Spanish to ensure Dual Language compliance and quality. ● We endorse the belief that that students learn best by using different learning modalities to support individual student’s needs (i.e., graphic organizers, technology, mainipulatives, charts, Socratic Method, and teacher-made resources). ● Grades 4th and 5th are departmentalized as our school takes part of Equity & Excellence for All Initiative, Algebra for All. Students in Grades 4th and 5th will be taught Math/Science and ELA/SS by two highly qualified teachers enabling students to receive content instruction by teachers who specialize in either Math or Literacy thereby preparing our students for college and careers. Also, our students already began to take advance math and science classes in the middle school. ● We continue to support teachers’ inter-visitations on and off site. ● Elementary school enrichment classes include English Language Arts, Spanish, College and Career Readiness through Literacy and Numeracy (i-Ready), Music, Art and Technology. ● Middle School enrichment classes include College and Career Readiness, Math, Art, Music, and Health. ● There are Integrated Co-Teaching classes in Kindergarten, First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth Seventh and Eighth grades receiving instruction in English and Spanish: Dual Language Model. ● The middle school offers Common Core Algebra I and a Living Environment Class for all 8th-grade classes. ● Smart boards are utilized in the classroom to guide instruction, support the visual learners, English Language Learners, students with disabilities and high performers. ● Leveled texts and grade-appropriate manipulatives are used to support student engagement and achievement. ● The utilization of computer-based programs, (Literacy & Mathematics) and i-Ready are frequently used at school and home to support student achievement. Technology is infused in the content areas. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have students with disabilities, English as a New Language and high-performing students. For students with disabilities, we provide Integrating Co-Teaching classes with two teachers: one is a GedEd and the other is a Special Education teacher. Also, for students that require only related services, we have a team of highly-qualified related services providers supported by the Field Support Depot. For students who are ENL, we have Dual Language classes in our K-8 school, including Self-Contained Dual Language, Side-by-Side model for K-2 and 60/40 model for grades 3-8. Additionally, we have a team of three licensed ESL/ENL/TESOL teachers who work closely with teachers. And we also 2  provide After-School and Saturday Academies to support their language acquisition. And finally, to support our high performing students, the middle school provides 9th-grade content-specific classes; i.e., Living Environment, Common Core Algebra I and Advance English. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school made the most progress in Strong Family-Community Ties, Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, and Rigorous Instruction. Effective School Leadership and Trust were areas of focus for this school year 2017-2018. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X218 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 1009 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 74 9 27 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 86.0% % Reduced Lunch 28.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 91.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.18 0% 19% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 38.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 74% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 126 120 94.3% 0.7% 18.9% 4.4% 2.8% 0.8% 6 12% 7 31.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all Kindergarten to Grade 5 teachers instructing in mathematics will continue to use Engage NY as their primary teaching mathematics resource, leading to a 3 percent increase in 3-5 students scoring at or above proficiency (levels 3 and 4) as measured by the NYS math assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Transition the elementary math program from Go Math to Engage NY, a program that is totally aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS). Professional development will be offered on an ongoing basis throughout the school year for all K-5 teachers. All students K-5 including ELL’s and SWD September 2018 to October 2018 Math implementation team guided by math consultant The ESL teachers will also be included in the math professional development throughout the year and they can assist the teachers develop the math lessons with scaffolds and ESL strategies. All 3 ESL teachers September 2018 to June 2019 ESL teachers will work closely with classroom teachers and consultant Provide pre-module planning time for elementary teachers with Middle School math experts through the work of the Grade Teacher Teams and Teacher Rounds cyclic process. Contract two external Math Consultants to oversee the transition and implementation process and provide in classroom modeling and coaching, together with workshop activities to deepen teacher understanding of the CCLS to all elementary teachers. Provide opportunities for grade teams to work collaboratively to examine student work and make adjustments to teaching instruction as emerging needs arise During Family Engagement Night, teachers provide professional development to families in order to help them understand Common Core and how they could help their child at home. All students K-5 including ELL’s and SWD All students K-5 including ELL’s and SWD All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD K-2, 3-5 and 6-8 teachers October 2018 to June 2019 PLC planning committee September 2018 to June 2019 Math consultants for K-2 and Grades 3-5 Assistant Principals K-2 and 3-5 and 6-8 Classroom Teachers and Consultants September 2018 to June 2019 September & November 2018; May 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. As part of our efforts to continue to improve families engagement, we will hold an informational evening in September 2018. Here, parents will receive a summary of what their children will learn during the school year. Also, our school will send to parents three Newsletters where it will inform parents of the different units their students will be studying and learning. During Parental Engagement time on Tuesdays (2:20 pm-3:45 pm) teachers also provide 6  curricula information to parents regarding how they support their children at home with homework and studying. Coffee with the Principal is a semi-monthly meeting with parents where the Principal invites teachers, coaches, and community leaders/providers to provide parents with important information about curricula, policy, health, resources, and safety information. Additionally, our weekly Parent Coordinator and Parent Association meetings provide parents with information regarding Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core so that they can, in turn, support their children at home. An Agenda is produced for all these meetings to ensure accountability. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Ongoing professional development will continue to be scheduled for our school community. Every month, our Math consultant and assistant principals will review teaching instruction using the data from Advance to determine the next steps to support teachers in providing rigorous math instruction. Lunch and learns provided to differentiate and scaffold Professional learning. The administration will continue to facilitate professional development sessions focusing on the Common Core Learning Standards. Inquiry work through PLC process will focus on improving teacher instruction. Both the assistant principals and math coach are valuable resources for grade level planning and vertical planning (Special Education and ELL’s. The administration will continue to schedule weekly opportunities for planning. Resource materials to support planning include the complete modules from Engage NY program for all teachers from K-5 Assistant Principals, math consultant (when visiting school) will guide grade team leaders by attending grade level planning meetings to support the development of grade wide exams in selected content areas. Data specialist will support the inputting of all student data. Schedule professional development on Chancellor’s days that are embedded in a concept of collective efficacy and designed to examine student progress and identify actions that will improve student performance. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teaching teams will be measuring student progress based on the mid and end of module assessments provided in Engage NY math program and recorded on the school data base. By February 2019, 2 parent information sessions will have been held to provide information to the parents and the wider community on the expectations of the Common Core Mathematics as evidenced by information nights agendas and attendance records 7  By February 2019, all teachers will have engaged in professional learning to deepen content understanding and enhance teaching practices pertaining to mathematics. This outcome will be evidenced in comments collected from evaluation data. By February 2019, all students will have engaged in a regular and specific program developing college and career readiness skills. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Baselines, midlines, endlines, periodic assessments, DRA2 plus, classroom data,MSQI, Danielson Framework, Quality Review Rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. The school will continue to implement the TCI program that teaches educators how to help students learn constructive and adaptive ways to deal with feelings such as frustration, failure, anger, rejection, hurt and depression. This need was identified from the analysis of the TCIS survey in February 2018. As part of the process for measuring the impact of implementing the therapeutic Crisis Intervention for School (TCIS) program, a survey responded to by 80 staff identified a number of issues that need to be addressed to ensure consistent approach to supporting the students at P.S./I.S. 218 and ensuring all members of the school feel psychologically safe. 69% of staff feel the majority of faculty do not feel valued and listened to. 65% of staff report difficulty in resolving differences with the majority of their colleagues. 32% of the teachers find the majority of students difficult to work with. 54% of staff report having difficulty managing student behavior most of the time. 57% of staff report adults are supportive of students when disciplining them 31% report that some staff do resort to punishment and shaming when disciplining students. 54% of staff report that the majority of students are reluctant to correct peers who use destructive or abusive language. 9  From analysis of student responses in the progress report 2017-18 the following was noted 11% of students feel unsafe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker rooms and cafeteria 13% of students felt unsafe on school property outside the school building 28.2% feel they are harassed or bullied by other students This was a similar response to the parent perceptions where they 10% believed their child was involved in physical fights and 12% believed that students were harassed or bullied. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff who have direct contact with students will be trained in the behavior support program ‘Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) as evidenced by a decrease in the number of dean referrals from September to June. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Contract with Cornell University, Program Managers Josh Fox and Ivette Stern, to implement the Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools initiative (TCIS) through one and one training, with the teachers, modeling and demonstration lessons, observe and provide feedback. All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD Monitor the impact of the program through the completion of a second survey in November to ascertain changes since first survey was completed in January 2017 pre implementation of TCIS program. TCI Personnel will work with school dean and classroom teachers to create a behavioral plan for SWD students. All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Josh Fox, and Ivette Stern November 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Josh Fox, and Ivette Stern Provide to the parent and wider school community information on the TCIS and offer an opportunity for selected parents to be trained in TCIS. March 2019 Principal, Josh Fox and Ivette Stern All students K-5 including ELL’s and SWD and families 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school Survey shows that our school is doing very well supporting our families. We will continue to improve how our school support families to understand our school's supportive Environment. To continue to assist our staff in creating and supporting a supportive environment, we are part of the Therapeutic Crisis Intervention program to continue to train all of our staff on how to de-escalate the crisis and create a supportive environment. The training is four days at the UFT building in 52 Broadway, 19th floor. Also, we have a PBIS Team comprise of teachers, related services providers, school psychologist, social worker, guidance counselor, administration and paraprofesional. The PBIS Team meets twice a month. Additionally, all school staff is responsible for creating a supportive environment for all of our students, staff, CBO, and parents. Finally, our school will continue to welcome parents, the community, and visitors; send regular communications to parents; communicate school goals to staff, students, parents, and CBO; during weekly PDs for parents provided by Parent Coordinator; monthly Parent Association Meetings; and finally, working closely with School Leadership Team. The school monthly calendar and meeting agendas will attest to the services we provide to our families and its effectiveness in improving a supportive environment. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 1  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Implementation of the TCIS program by external consultants. Planning time for external consultants to observe and meet with individual and grade level teachers to identify next steps in supporting teachers in implementing the program. Annual School Survey TCIS Survey measuring factors related to school environment Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers have completed the phase 2 training in the TCIS program. By February 2019 the second survey will be completed and the responses analyzed to identify next steps in implementing the TCIS program. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCI administer two staff surveys during the school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring Classroom observations as part of the Advance process and feedback from the reviewer identified that only some students were aware of what they were learning and how this learning would help them to master the standards. There is a need to implement strategies that enable all students to participate in their own learning process. There is also a need to provide a learning environment that reflects the range of learners and provides multiple points of entry for all students. There is a need to develop an electronic tracking data base to ensure teaching instruction is tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. In order to achieve continual improvement in teaching best practices and student learning, teachers need to engage collaboratively and engage in sustained professional learning. Teachers and educators need to reflect on professional practice, collaborate and share ideas, and set learning targets so that students can achieve academic success. As a school we need to strengthen this work towards building teacher capacity and sharing best practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have engaged in professional learning on a regular basis through collaboration in analyzing student work, setting learning targets and monitoring student learning in order to strengthen and deepen understanding about teaching and learning measured by an increase in participation in Professional Learning Communities and Professional Development Log. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Provide pre-module planning time for elementary teachers with Middle School math experts through the work of the Professional Learning Community (PLC) cyclic process. Provide opportunities for grade teams to work collaboratively to examine student work and make adjustments to teaching instruction as emerging needs arise Establish a cohesive school wide assessment framework to monitor student progress of all student cohort groups including students with disabilities and English language learners Develop and implement a data system that enables the sharing of student progress data across the school in a timely and consistent manner. School Data System will be shared with families and workshop for new parents. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? October 2018 to June 2019 Math implementation team guided by Math Consultants September 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals K-2 and 3-5 and 6-8 September 2018 to June 2019 Technology Leader from middle school Principal and Math Consultant September 2018 to October 2019 Technology Leader from middle school Principal and Math Consultant All students K-5 including ELL’s and SWD and elementary teachers All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD and teachers All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD teachers, and families All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD teachers, administrators and families How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our Family Night in September 2018 and May 2019, teachers will communicate to parents via a presentation on how they collaborate with one another to keep improving teaching and learning. Also, the Principal holds "Coffee with the Principal" meeting every two months with families where he will communicate to families how teachers collaborate with one another to improve teaching and learning and teacher-parent collaborations to support their children at home. Also, during "Coffee with the Principal," teachers, coaches, safety, community leaders and CBO are invited to provide information to families. Every grade-band, for example, K-2, 3-5 and 6-8 will send parents a Dual Language (Spanish and English) newsletter detailing curricula collaboration, homework, and exams strategies so that 4  families will be informed. These newsletters will be given in September during Family Night, January 2019 will be sent home with students, and in May 2019 during Family Night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Advance data system ‘I can statements’ from North Dakota DOE site Scheduled times for grade team meetings Whole school shared domain data management system that enable all student assessment data to be shared. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, more than 80% of teachers will have been involved in collaborative activity that focuses on looking at student work to improve teaching instruction. By Feb 2019 50% of the elementary teachers will have engaged in professional learning activities led by the selected middle school math leaders as evidenced from participation records. By February 2019, all elementary students will have developed a learning target that aligns to the standards By February 2019, a data system will be developed and elementary student data uploaded and used by grade teams to improve instruction. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Team Meeting Agendas, Google Drive Data upload, Unit Assessments' tasks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In order to articulate clear expectations for teacher practice, the school leadership (principal and assistant principals) needs to engage in frequent classroom observations to provide actionable feedback to teachers. The Charlotte Danielson’s Teachscape Framework which is research based provides a common language for teachers and administrators to build upon. From analysis of current work practices and personal reflection of current links between teacher observation process and student performance there is a need to develop and implement a shared data system that can be used to engage teachers in professional conversations with supervisors. From an analysis of the teacher performance as observed in 2016-17 and recorded on the Advance database it was identified that component 3b Questioning and Discussion was an area for growth as approximately 30% of the teachers were rated as ineffective or developing in this component. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the administration will ensure that all the student data relating to elementary math progress will be uploaded onto a shared server and used by collective groups of teachers to identify the impact of teaching instruction on a student cohort groups including ELLs and SWDs as measured by the number of students who meet or exceed the pass-rate of End of Unit Assessments. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Establish a cohesive school wide math assessment framework to monitor student progress of all student cohort groups including students with disabilities and English language learners. Professional development will be provided every Monday and during weekly departmental meetings. Develop and implement a data system that enables the sharing of student progress data across the school in a timely and consistent manner Develop a feedback schedule that ensures each teacher is supported in identifying the needs of all groups of students including SWDs and ELLs and determining teaching strategies to address them. Supervisors, coaches and mentors provide to teachers explicit and actionable feedback on the questioning and discussion observed. Workshops will be offered to parents on Curriculum Nights, Tuesdays during Parental Engagement Time, and by the Parent Coordinator. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD September 2018 to June 2019 Technology Leader from middle school Principal and Math Consultant All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD, teachers and families All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD Principal and Assistant Principals and Teachers All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD and teachers K-8 Parents September 2018 to June 2019 Technology Leader from middle school Principal and Math Consultant September 2018 to June 2019 Principal and K-2 and 3-5, 6-8 Assistant Principals September 2018 to June 2019 Supervisors, coaches, mentors September 2018 to June 2019 Classroom teachers and consultants How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our Family Night in September 2018 and May 2019, teachers and Administration will communicate to parents via a short presentation on how our school leadership can collaborate with families and community to keep improving teaching and learning and family support at home. The school Principal (who is also the Principal-Teacher) holds 7  "Coffee with the Principal" meeting every two months with families where he will communicate to families how the school community collaborates with families to improve teaching and learning and teacher-parent collaborations to support their children at home. Also, during "Coffee with the Principal," teachers, coaches, safety, community leaders and CBO are invited to provide information to families to keep them abreast of all school policies and events. Every grade-band, for example, K-2, 3-5 and 6-8 will send parents a Dual Language (Spanish and English) newsletter detailing curricula collaboration, homework, and exams strategies so that families will be informed. These newsletters will be given in September during Family Night, January 2019 will be sent home with students, and in May 2019 during Family Night. Additionally, our school sends a monthly calendar to families in two languages (English and Spanish) to communicate all of the events and professional development to families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Advance system of teacher evaluation and development, Principal and Assistant Principals and all teachers Text – Math Discussions – Using Math talk to help students learn. Opportunities for teachers to participate in lunch and learn sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, a data system will be developed and elementary student data uploaded and used by grade teams to improve instruction. By February 2019, there will documented evidence that supervisors have had at least 3 conversations with individual or groups of elementary teachers focusing on student performance in mathematics. By February 2019, there will be documented evidence that at least 3 conversations between supervisors and teachers, provided actionable feedback on questioning and discussion. By February 2019, a minimum of 70% of scheduled classroom observations will be completed and notes uploaded onto Advance. By February 2019, a minimum of 8 meetings with the Principal and the Assistant Principals will be held that focused the discussion on teacher performance – looking at rigor as evidenced by meeting notes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Baselines, midlines, endlines, periodic assessments, DRA2 plus, classroom data, MSQI, Danielson Framework, Quality Review Rubric. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This school is recognized by the wider community for the strong links it has forged between the families and entire school staff. To further embed this value in the school culture we need to provide additional information to the parents on how the school supports students in preparation for the state tests. This was recognized as an area of need in the 2018-2019 school survey where 15 percent of parents identified this as an improvement they would like to see the school make. From feedback and general community concerns of the impact of the Common Core on student performance, there is a need to provide additional information to the parents on what the children are learning in literacy and numeracy. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the parents are receiving a Dual Language Newsletter outlining the main areas of learning for the current topic in literacy and numeracy. as evidenced by the Parents' Survey responses. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Work with the Parents Association and the School Leadership Team to support clear communication and address any issues as soon as possible Families Work with Parent Coordinator to ensure that she has the most current information on curriculum, work shop dates/times, Assistant Principals to support teachers in developing or obtaining information newsletters for parents Use Tuesday’s parental planning time to for selected teachers to develop or obtain newsletters on a monthly basis, to inform families what their child is learning in literacy and numeracy and how they can support their child. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD Parent coordinator and Families All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD Selected Teachers and Families All students K-8 including ELL’s and SWD Teachers and Families Principal Principal September 2018 to June 2019 September 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals September 2018 to June 2019 Assistant Principals September 2018 to June 2019 If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our Community Based Organization, WHEDCo provides various support to our school community. For example, it has an outstanding after-school program from 2:20 pm to 5:00 pm, Monday through Friday, when school is not in session and a Summer Camp during the Summer. Additionally, WHEDCo shares a full-time social worker with our school where parents receive social-emotional and mental health services. We also partner with Cool Culture and they provide Free Pass to Families so that they can visit any cultural institution in the city for free. Morrisania Clinic provides free services to our school community as well. And BronxWorks also provide our school community with many resources, i.e, high-tech water fountains for our students and free professional development for staff and parents. 0  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Appointment of Parent Co-coordinator. Funds for presenting family workshops and teacher/family information sessions. Stationery resources to enable families to be provided with parent support materials. Active Parent Association. WHEDCo, Community-Based Organization. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, parents will have received three newsletters providing information on the CCLS in literacy and numeracy By February 2019, a least one parent workshop/information session will have been offered as evidenced from meeting agenda and participation records. By February 2019, at least three conversations evidenced by meeting agenda will be had with the Parent Association and Leadership Team on CCLS. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Collection of newsletters. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group one-to-one peer-tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day After-school Program Saturday Academies Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) AIS – Tis small group instruction services students in K-5 by AIS teachers with a focus on accuracy, fluency and comprehension skills based on need Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Through the use of universal screening tools as well as classroom level assessments, teachers are able to refer students to the RTI committee. The committee will review the areas of concern and make recommendations for Tier 1, 2 or 3 intervention services Through school level data analysis of the NYS ELA Exam, students receiving level 1 will be identified and targeted for intervention services. Through the use of universal screening tools as well as classroom level assessments, teachers are able to refer students to the RTI committee. The committee will review the areas of concern and make recommendations for 2 Tier 1, 2 or 3 intervention services Through school level analysis of the NYS Math Exam, students receiving level1 will be identified and targeted for intervention services Through classroom level assessments analysis, students are identified for intervention services Through classroom level assessments analysis, students are identified for intervention services Through the recommendations of teachers, para-professionals, parents, ACS workers, students are identified for intervention services Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day During the school day Small group Small group Small group One to one One to one The Guidance Counselor services mandated and at-risk students The school Social Worker takes care of mandated and at-risk services The SETSS provider meets with at-risk students on a weekly basis. There is a nurse who addresses health concern daily. The Occupational and Physical therapists do classroom observations to make recommendations around sensory needs as well as fine and gross motor skills for at-risk students. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 112 STH. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. At the start of the school year, we provide them with a school backpack full of necessary items. Our school also provide them with the necessary uniforms. Our guidance counselors provide the families with information, support and academic guidance. Also, all STH population is invited to our after-school academic programs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We are a Title I school 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  We are a Title I School 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. We are a Title I school 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The school offers professional development, outside PD, inter-visitation both within the school and the District. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our school works with high qualified consultants to provide high quality professional development to our staff in literacy and numeracy. Additionally, the assistant principals also participate in the professional development given to staff. The District also has PD for assistant Principals and principals. And finally, the Department of Education also provides with high-quality professional development for all staff. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Curricula will be constantly aligned to assist preschool children entering Kindergarten adapt to grade by using pictures, colorful charts, music, art, technology, and constructive playing time. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers work with lead teachers and administration in the decision making process to use and select appropriate multiple assessment measures and professional development offered and sought. Also, our school participates in Teachers Rounds where they make all decisions regarding assessments to improve instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5, 5B, 5C, 5D & 5E 5, 5B, 5C, 5D & 5E 5E 5, 5B, 5C, 5D & 5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 870,940 95,959 40,398 0 6,520,402 7  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 8  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 9  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S./I.S. 218, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Rafael Hernández Dual Language Magnet School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 0  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 1  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS/IS 218, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 3  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 4  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 5  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Rafael Dual Language School is working towards strategic instruction for our 254 ELLs (1-8). Their scores range across all proficiency levels. Included in our total ELL population are 40 Long Term ELLs and 127 ELLs at-risk levels 3 or greater, according the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT). ELLs whose score on the NYSESLAT did not progress or regressed is 155. In addition, we will extend Title III programs to ELLs and non-ELLs in grades 1-5 that performed below average on the DRA2 and New York State ELA and Math exams (grades 3-5). Our focus is to develop and strengthen the basic literacy and math skills of low performing students through direct instruction in classrooms and small groups. After School Academy- Wednesday & Thursday in English from November to May. Below is the structure for the after school program: Wednesday/ Thursday–facilitated by ENL coordinator: • Grades 1-5, EDAT and DRA2-below average • 7 ENL/Bilingual-certified teachers • 12+ sessions,3 hours per week • English/Spanish Guided Reading library, Reader’s Theatre, , Teacher-made materials, and NYSESLAT preparation Wednesday/Thursday –facilitated by ENL teachers • Grades 6-8, Long Term ELLs and DRA2-below average • 2 certified ENL teachers • 12 sessions, 3 hours per week • English instruction • Reader’s Theatre, Finish Line New York ELLs, Teacher-made materials, NYSESLAT preparation Saturday School Academy- facilitated by ENL coordinators • Grades 1-3 and 6-8, ELLs in Whedco, those that regressed or made no progress on the NYSESLAT • 3 ENL -certified teachers • 12+ sessions, 3 hrs a week • English • English Guided Reading library, Reader’s Theatre, iReady computer program, NYSESLAT preparation, Teacher-made materials The focus for the groups is to improve students’ fluency in reading, writing, speaking and listening through the content areas. Through the use of multi-sensory approach and Howard Gardener’s multiple intelligences teachers will work towards filling the gaps by providing interactive and guided language practice. This research based approach builds on students understanding of phonics, vocabulary, and grammar while also developing better time management and organizational skills. Attendance will remain with the school secretary in the main office and records will be kept in the ENL coordinators' office. Parent communication and notification will be sent in English and in parents' preferred language. 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information INSTRUCTION PRIMARY GRADES GUIDED READING (1-2) The primary grades enrichment program will target the lowest performing ELLs in literacy based on the DRA2 results. In order to help these students strengthen their literacy skills, we will be focusing on intensive Guided Literacy and phonics instruction. This direct instruction will be provided by bilingual teachers who teach the English component of the dual language model. Teachers will have access to guided reading text sets that are available for students in their instructional reading level. Additionally, continued professional development will be offered by exemplary guided literacy instructors to continue to strengthen teachers’ use of best practices for intervention. READER’S THEATRE GRADES 3-8 Based on NYSESLAT data analysis and DRA2, students show a need in reading and listening. DRA2 data shows that fluency is a common area with which students at risk levels 3 + experience difficulty. Reading fluency is essential to all learning and comprehension. Therefore, we have chosen guided reading and Reader’s Theater program as a way to improve fluency and comprehension. By reading texts several times, the students will be able to improve their fluency. Beyond improving fluency and comprehension, Reader’s Theater is a method that can be used to improve natural speech, self-control, motivation, and empathy in a non-threatening environment. Students in grades 3-8 will focus on guided reading to improve fluency, comprehension, and language development. Students will work with their teachers in re-enacting stories that they read and heard. The re-enactments will support comprehensible input by allowing students to reread, discuss and engage in story elements; encouraging verbal interaction, contextualizing language, building confidence and supporting engagement. Teachers will choose stories based on students’ levels, ages, and interests. Reader’s theater is a way for reading activities to be engaging, yet supporting learning. This program will be mentally and physically stimulating and allow all students to participate despite their skill levels. In addition, the theater program is an opportunity to enhance character education. Teachers will choose a variety of plays and stories based on interesting content and themes based on student’s ages and interests. Themes range from health, sports, the arts, all core subject areas, and character development situations. Teachers will assign roles to students based on their age and ability. Students will be reading together, while still being able to read at their own level. Students will read one play per week in small groups of 6 students, including 1-3 repeat readings. The small groups will also have assessments and supplemental activities that go beyond the story into other content areas and character education. At the end of the program, teachers and students will choose their favorite play and perform it for their peers and families or create a project to present to their classmates. For the first reading, the teacher will take a role in a small group and read with students. This will be an opportunity to coach and model how to read with expression and follow the reading. The small groups will rotate and engage in supplemental activities related to the story, while each group does their first reading with the teacher. During the two days, students will repeat the reading 1-3 times in their groups and engage in supplemental activities. The reading activities will range from 30-60 minutes. Some groups will read various plays amongst their small groups, while others will choose to read the same play. ASSESSMENT Assessments will include DRA2, test preparation books assessments, pre and post teacher created assessments, informal observations, and online program progress monitoring. In addition, the Reader’s Theater includes its own assessment. It is given before, once during and after the Reader’s Theater program. The school will use other funding sources such as Fair Student Funding and Title I SWP to complement the cost of the Title III program activities. 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: As a dual language school, language acquisition is always at our center. Teachers attend professional development surrounding language learning throughout the school year and during the designated after school allotted time. Particularly, those in the after school language program will focus on the targeted population using the data analysis tool (EDAT) and the teacher collected data. Using this data, Title III funding for professional development will focus on becoming familiar with program components and expanding the program to those within the targeted subgroups. Additional topics during the professional development time will be data analysis and instructional strengths and challenges. Alternating Monday contracted professional development allotted time, meetings will be held to discuss the curriculum development/ programming, next steps, student data, teacher survey feedback and ideas for centers. Staff Development/Training can be helpful for after-school staff when implementing reading activities. Both professional development records will be maintained, including attendance and agenda sheets, in the ENL office in the Title III binder. Teachers will review material instructions provided by publishers and view online training webinars. Three ENL teachers (Luisa Arias, Brenda DosSantos and Tracey Igwe), will provide professional development to the after school teachers. This component is at no cost to the program, since it is part of the DOE contractual agreement. BOOK STUDY/ ELL PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT Along with the program essentials, teachers will meet for a book study surrounding Academic language and language acquisition. Prospective book titles include Academic Language in Diverse Classrooms by Margo Gottlieb, SIOP by Jana Echevarria and MaryEllen J.Vogt and Building Academic Language by Jeff Zwiers. Also, teachers will review the NYSESLAT preparation materials and identifying language objectives based on questions on the NYSESLAT preparation guide and all language progressions. Each session will be facilitated by an ENL/Bilingual teacher. Likewise, teachers who would like to attend other workshops that are offered by the Office of English Language Learners are encouraged. These strategies will be used during small group instruction, and while working with individual students who needed additional academic support throughout the school day and during the after school program. 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The Rafael Hernandez Dual Language School understands the importance of parental involvement. The strategies shared with parents are our best practices which will support all learners especially our ELLs. Each workshop will be at least an hour long and provide families with relevant materials in English and the home language by either a translator or bilingual teacher. Every Tuesday during Parental Engagement time 2:20-3:00pm parents are invited to come and speak to the ENL teachers. Parents can obtain information on their child’s progress and receive parental resources offered by the Title III program. ENL teachers will facilitate, Title III End of Year Parental Meeting to discuss program success and improvements. Agenda, attendance and invitation/calendar will be maintained in the ENL office. Parents will receive this information in their preferred language as well as English. Parents will also be invited to participate in workshops, held in English and Spanish, focusing on the importance of literacy at home and school, along with the continued benefits of a dual language education. Records will be held in parent coordinator (Zenith Morales) room. Some family and community engagement activities that we plan to offer our parents are as follows: • Workshop Topics: “Prepare your Children to be Excellent Learners”; “Why is a Dual Language Program Important”, “Preparing your Child for College”, “Study Skills”, “Fresh Air Fund Vacation for your child”, and “Cyber Bullying” • Citizen Preparedness and “Key to the City” • Partnership with Bridge Builders Community to preserve families within our community Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $26,598  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials $0 $6,305 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. For after-school and Saturday programs 1 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Rader's Theatre, Time for Kids, National Geographic, literacy program for ELLs, Finish Line, New York ELLs, Bilingual Glossaries. Online Literacy Program Parent Involvement  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $0 $0 $3,655 $36,558 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Rafael Hernandez Dual Language School Borough Bronx School Number 218 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Serge Caceres Coach Ms. Moreira ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Arias,Ms.DosSantos, Ms. Igwe Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Daniel/ Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Ms. Hernandez/teacher Related-Service Provider Ms. Seminario Superintendent Ms. Leticia Rosario-Rodriguez Assistant Principal Ms. Stylianou Coach type here School Counselor Leticia Ojeda Parent Catalina Alvarado Parent Coordinator Ms. Zeneth Morales Field Support Center Staff Member Kristy De la Cruz Other (Name and Title) Victor Gilbes/Data C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 12 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 45 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 1004 Total number of ELLs 289 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 28.78% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Yes NoFreestanding ENL Yes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): English/Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2 3 4 K 1 English Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 9 9 0 18 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The tools our school uses to assess the early Literacy skills of our ELLs are DRA in English and Spanish, Estrellita in Spanish, teacher created assessments such as baseline, midline and endline; NYC K-2 Perfomance Task, 3-8 NYC Performance Series grades 3-5 Literacy and Math, 6-8 in all content areas, Early Reading Matters literacy benchmark tracker in English and Spanish, and i-Ready. Based on the English assessments for grades K-2, we notice many of our ELLs need explicit phonics instruction and language development skills. As a result of this data analysis, we have phonics period and Guided Literacy period to address these concerns. Also, teachers throughout the primary grades are infusing Orton Gillingham into the phonics/language development instruction. In grades K-8, our teachers have the support and receive professional development by literacy coaches, focusing on instruction, grouping, data, and strategies. In addition, an early literacy consultant comes in to supporting early language and literacy. All students in grades K-8 use an adaptive diagnostic 4  individualized instructional program in Reading and Math aligned with CCLS, teachers can monitor students progress and use the data to provide individual and small group instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? During the school year we have scheduled weekly professional development activities with coaching support and modeling, teacher classroom inter-visitations and vertical alignment meetings/ working groups. A structure put in place is a new phonics pacing has been created to reflect the Dual Language instructional model. Early Reading Matters has developed grade team literacy teacher leads. The NYC DOE has also provided as an additional support an Universal Literacy Coach in grades K-2. In addition continuous support from two math consultants one for grades k-2, and the other for grades 3-5. Additional literacy support is given to grades 3-8, from outside consultants. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is measured using a few different sources. Currently, we are meeting AYP for ELLs. Also, we use the EDAT. In addition, our school uses state, city and teacher created assessments to evaluate ELLs in different subjects, languages and modalities. Our schools uses a variety of assessments to inform our instruction. Such as end of unit test and task-based assessment, ELL Periodic Assessments, ELE and baseline assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The school intervention teams and programs in place to target summative data are RTI-SIT team which encompass Special Education team , General Education teachers, Assistant principal, guidance counselor, and an ENL teacher. Together they meet to identify and develop SMART goals for the students in General Education. If an action plan is needed, the RTI team begins a process for these students to show progress in their academic areas in an allotted time frame. Meanwhile, this team supports teachers with strategies and discussion surrounding student progress. In addition to the team's insight, DRA, i-Ready, and progress monitoring are tools used by teachers to gather information within a given 6-8 week period. After this time period is complete, students' results from a formative assessment are reviewed and the action plan is revised if needed. When necessary, the student moves to the next step in the RTI process and an out of the classroom specialist begins working with the child with the 6-8 week time frame. If the student does not show progress, then the parent is notified about the data collected. If the parent agrees, then the child will be evaluated for Special Education Services. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The RTI team conducts a (preliminary/initial) analysis of the skills that are necessary for students to succeed across grade bands and content areas. The team provides strategic and targeted supports in the development of teacher-created action plans. These action plans focus on implementing techniques that enhance student engagement in the classroom, promote academic literacy skills and incorporate culturally-relevant materials into lesson-planning. Once strategies have been put into effect, teachers will monitor student progress through periodic assessments. The data will be gathered biweekly or monthly for instructors to analyze student progress. If students do not demonstrate an improvement in the targeted skills, they will be moved to Tier 2, in which AIS will be provided to small groups by a bilingual certified teacher who will also create an action plan in coordination with the content area instructor. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Several outcome assessments are used to evaluate and inform our ELL program, such as, NY state ELA and Math exams, and NYSESLAT. The NYSESLAT is used to evaluate the English language proficiency of our ELL population. This information is used to inform instruction for the following school year as it is administered yearly each spring. The NYSESLAT helps ENL specialists to determine the skills with which our students have difficulty, and therefore, provide the foundation for any/all interventions for the modalities that require improvement. For example, an analysis of the 2017 NYSESLAT revealed that ELLs across all grade bands struggled with the writing portion of the exam. On the other hand, students generally performed well with the speaking portion. Instructors can use this information to incorporate more strategies for improving written output, such as the use of 5  graphic organizers, and ensuring that language objectives target the skills needed for students to organize their writing so that ideas develop coherently and cohesively. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In order to ensure that this data is disseminated appropriately, weekly grade team meetings are conducted, which include content area instructors, ENL service providers and Special Education service providers. These meetings encourage data driven, collaborative curriculum planning between all pedagogues to support student literacy skills. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Not Applicable b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. In order to promote language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards, teachers have been trained in scaffolding, differentiation, vocabulary approaches, and methods. In addition, teachers incorporate activities that include students' different learning styles and interests. Language development is supported implicitly and explicitly across all subjects. Our language and instructional approaches are based on both authentic and standardized assessment. This includes explicit language and content objectives within each lesson aligned to the Common Core State Standards as well as ENL State Standards. Our focus continues to be scaffolding, accountable talk and expressing those ideas through writing. To meet the needs of our students in HLA, teachers aligned the curriculum with the Common Core State Standards. In all grades, Standalone Instruction is delivered by an ENL teacher, who focuses on speaking and listening development with the use of grade appropriate curriculum-based materials. In all program models students are grouped heterogeneously. The program models and specifications are as follows: Dual Language (K-2) • 50/50 side-by-side model • Alternates between two classrooms every other day • 2 teachers in separate classrooms o One teaching English(Common Branch license and Bilingual Extension) o One teaching Spanish (bilingual license) • All subjects taught in both languages • Lessons are continued from previous day • Partner teachers work closely with one another in planning • Simultaneously, Emergent literacy is taught in both languages • Cluster teachers may teach in either English or Spanish ICT Dual Language Self Contained (K-2) • 50/50 self-contained model • Alternate between two languages every other day 6  • 2 teachers in 1 classroom (one having a certification in Special Education) o One teaching English(common branch license and bilingual extension) o One teaching Spanish (bilingual licence) • All subjects taught in both languages • Lessons are continued from previous day • Partner teachers work closely with one another in planning • Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously in both languages • Cluster teachers may teach in either English or Spanish Dual Language Self Contained (3rd) • 60% English 40% Spanish self-contained • 1 teacher (Common Branch license with Bilingual Extension) • ELA is taught in English • Math is taught 2 periods in Spanish and the remaining periods in English • Science and Social Studies are taught in Spanish • Home Language Arts in Spanish content through social studies literature and/or HLA teacher provides explicit Spanish instruction • Grade teachers work closely with one another in planning • Cluster teachers teach in English or Spanish ICT Dual Language Self Contained (3rd) • 60% English 40% Spanish self-contained • 2 teachers in one classroom o One teaching English(Common Branch license and Bilingual extension or Common Branch only) o One teaching English/Spanish (Special Education with Bilingual extension or Special Education only) • ELA is taught in English • 3 periods of Math are taught in English and 2 periods in Spanish • Science and Social Studies are taught in Spanish • Home Language Arts in Spanish through social studies literature and/or HLA teacher provides explicit Spanish instruction • Partner teachers work closely with one another in planning • Cluster teachers teach in English or Spanish Dual Language (4-5) Departmentalized • 60% English 40% Spanish • 2 teacher (one teacher with a common branch license with Bilingual Extension or/and the other common branch licence) • 2 classrooms • ELA is taught solely in English • 3 periods of Math is taught in English and 2 periods in Spanish • Science and Social Studies are taught in solely in Spanish • Home Language Arts in Spanish content through social studies literature and/or HLA teacher provides explicit Spanish instruction • Grade teachers work closely with one another in planning • Cluster teachers teach in English or Spanish ICT Dual Language (4-5) • 60% English 40% Spanish • 2 teachers in one classroom o One teaching English(Common Branch license and Bilingual extension or Common Branch only) o One teaching English/Spanish (Special Education with Bilingual extension or Special Education only) 7  • ELA is taught in English • 3 periods of Math are taught in English and 2 periods in Spanish • Science and Social Studies are taught in Spanish • Home Language Arts in Spanish through social studies literature and/or HLA teacher provides explicit Spanish instruction • Partner teachers work closely with one another in planning • Cluster teachers teach in English or Spanish Dual Language Middle School (6th)Departmentalized/Block • 70% English/ 30% Spanish • Different teachers for each core content area with content area license • ESOL teacher integrated ENL/Standalone ENL • 60 minute block per content area • English and Spanish alternated per content areas 60% English/40%Spanish (Science and Math) • Social Studies in Spanish • HLA through Social Studies literature ICT Dual Language Middle School (6th)Departmentalized/Block • 70% English/ 30% Spanish • One Special Education teacher and one General Education teacher with content area license • ESOL teacher integrated ENL/Standalone ENL • 60 minute block per content area • English and Spanish alternated per content areas 60% English/40%Spanish (Science and Math) • Social Studies in Spanish • HLA through Social Studies literature Dual Language Middle School (7th and 8th ) Departmentalized/Block • 70% English/ 30% Spanish • Different teachers for each core content area with content area license • ESOL teacher integrated ENL/Standalone ENL • 60 minute block per content area • English and Spanish Alternation in Math • English and Spanish alteration in 7th grade Science • 30% Social Studies in Spanish • HLA through social studies literature ICT Dual Language Middle School (7th and 8th ) Departmentalized/Block • 70% English/ 30% Spanish • One Special Education teacher and one General Education teacher with content area license • ESOL teacher integrated ENL/Standalone ENL • 60 minute block per content area • English and Spanish alternation in Math • English and Spanish alteration in 7th grade Science • 30% Social Studies in Spanish • HLA through social studies literature 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 8  Our staff is mostly composed of educators who are fluent in both, English and Spanish and hold a common branch license and/or bilingual extension. Our staff is strategically placed according to their license area and expertise. In K-5, Dual Language program, teachers who possess a valid certificate or working towards a bilingual extension are placed in either a self-contained or side-by-side setting. In both settings, instruction is delivered in English and Spanish. In grades 6-8, teachers who hold a content area certification with a bilingual extension teach in both English and/or Spanish. Teachers who possess a content area license teach in English. To ensure all ENL and ENL/ELA instructional minutes are met, According to CR Part 154.2 (K-8) ENL Units of Study and Staffing Requirements, students in grades K-8, considered entering based on NYSESLAT receive a total 360 minutes of ENL per week. They receive 1 unit (180 minutes) of standalone ENL with a certified ESOL teacher, and 1 unit (180 minutes) of integrated ENL/ELA with Bilingual Certified teacher in a side-by-side (K-2) or self-contained model (3-5) , or in a co-teaching setting with a certified ESOL teacher and Common Branch teacher (K-5) or a ESOL teacher and Content Area certified teacher in grades 6-8. Students considered emerging based on the NYSESLAT receive a total of ENL for 360 minutes a week. Emerging students in grades K-8 receive standalone ENL with a certified ESOL teacher for .5 unit (90 minutes) a week. They receive 270 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA with a Bilingual Certified teacher in a side-by- side (K-2) or self-contained model (3-5) or in a co-teaching setting with a certified ESOL teacher and Common Branch(K-5) or Content Area certified teacher(6-8). Students who are transitioning or expanding based on the NYSESLAT receive a total of 180 minutes a week (1 unit). These students receive all their services through integrated ENL/ELA from a Bilingual Certified teacher in a side-by-side (K-2) or self-contained model (3-5) or in a co-teaching setting with a certified ESOL teacher and Common Branch (K-5)/Content Area certified teacher (6-8). Lastly, students who are commanding based on the NYSESLAT receive .5 units 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA from a Bilingual Certified teacher in a side-by-side model (grades 1-2) or self-contained (grades 3-5) or in a co-teaching setting with a certified ESOL teacher and Common Branch (1-5)/Content Area certified teacher (6-8). In the side-by-side model K-2 students alternate between two classrooms every other day, one teacher delivers instruction in English and the other in Spanish (NLA). The lessons are continued the next day in the target language. The teacher who possesses a bilingual extension will deliver the instruction in English and/or in Spanish depending on the programming. HLA is provided on the Spanish days by the Spanish teacher throughout the entire day. Standalone ENL minutes is provided by an ESOL teacher for emerging/entering level and integrated ENL/ELA is provided by the bilingual certified teacher or co-taught by an ESOL teacher and common branch certified teacher . The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teacher to plan accordingly, meet student needs and provide the minutes according to their proficiency levels. In the side-by-side model in grades K-2, teachers hold a common branch license with a bilingual extension. These teachers deliver integrated ENL/ELA for all students. Emerging and entering students receive their additional 90 or 180 minutes in a pull-out stand-alone ENL setting with an ESOL teacher. One of the teachers in the side-by-side model is the Spanish teacher who delivers HLA instructional minutes. As the classes switch from Spanish to English every other day, this ensures students receive all NLA, ELA and ENL instructional minutes. In the self-contained model in grades 3-5, the teacher hold a common branch license with a bilingual extension. This teacher delivers all ENL, ELA and HLA minutes. HLA instructional minutes are delivered through social studies, science and math. Emerging and entering students also receive their standalone ENL minutes (90 or 180) with an ESOL teacher. 6 th -8 th grade students receive standalone ENL minutes by an ESOL teacher and integrated ENL/ELA by an ESOL teacher and a ELA certified teacher. The program model and minutes are determined by the level of proficiency. HLA for 6 th - 8 th grade is delivered through the content area in social studies, science and math by a content area teacher with a bilingual extension. 9  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core Content is delivered through Common Core aligned materials that promote language development through differentiated activities, as well as teacher created materials and resources. Throughout the grades, teachers are trained to prepare materials tailored to student needs and learning styles. Teachers use the language progressions to vary content, language and supports that are aligned to each standard. In grades k-2 R Ready Gen units have been revised in response to the Dual Language instructional model, in alignment with CCLS shifts and language development instruction. Grades 3-5 Ready Gen is used for ELA, while grades 6-8 uses Code-X. In k-2, HLA is taught through our in-house program, Estrellita/Etapas. In grades 3-8, HLA is taught within Social Studies Literature, along with teacher created materials. The programs used for Mathematics are Engage NY in English and Spanish for k-5, whereas in grades 6-8, CMP3 is used in English and Spanish. On the other hand, there is only one program used for Social Studies and Science in English and Spanish, NYC Scope and Sequence. All of these programs include methods that are alignment with the CCLS. They focus on language, content and supports for all language progression levels within each standard and lesson objective. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language throughout the year, ELLs in grades 3-8 in the Dual Language Program are evaluated in Spanish with informal and formal assessments. The informal assessments include teacher created tests; such as, ELA and content area unit tests; teacher classroom observations and assignments, and periodic writing tasks. Formal assessments include, the ELE. ELLs in grades K-2 are evaluated formally in their home language through baseline, midline and endline assessments. In grades K-2, students are given a pre-assessment and post-assessment for each lesson and unit for math. Etapas is used in conjunction with Estrellita/Etapas for phonics development. For writing, students are assessed during the year with a baseline, midline and endline assessment as well as a teacher created version of the MOSL in Spanish. Science and Social Studies are assessed with teacher created assessments for end of unit. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status A. SIFE The instructional plan in place for SIFE students is to offer one-on-one services, small group instruction, as well as, helping them assimilate to the school and classroom environments. Prior to differentiating instruction, ENL coordinators determine proficiency in students' home language using LAB-R and DRA. This information helps teachers differentiate instruction in the target language, through use of visuals, picture dictionaries, flashcards, manipulative, and collaborative learning activities. In addition, instructors incorporate culturally relevant materials to activate students' prior knowledge. Moreover, teachers create opportunities to develop pragmatic knowledge (turn-taking, classroom behavioral norms) for students with minimal formal education. B. Newcomer There are several programs that we continue to implement for our newcomer population. Newcomers receive support through several structures such as: balanced literacy, where they receive small group instruction during guided reading; language development and foundations program with a focus on vocabulary; and ENL/ELA integrated services. In grades 3-8, students are paired with another student who speaks in their native language to help them acclimate to the school and classroom environment. In sixth through eight grades, students who have been in a US school for less than three years are paired with a peer liaison and supported by the ENL teacher in developing their language skills through the standalone ENL program and with in- class support through the integrated ENL/ELA program. In addition to our daily plan for newcomers, after school and Saturday programs are provided for continuous support. The 3 0  rd- 5th and 6 th -8 th grade newcomers are placed in heterogeneous groups after school and the Saturday program for K-2 nd grade is designed for entering and emerging students. By utilizing different content areas, they are taught to achieve proficiency in the four modalities. C. Developing In analyzing the data we have found that 80 of the English Language Learners are eligible for an extension of services, since they have been ELLs for 4-6 years. Regarding the Special Education students, instruction is driven by IEP goals, NYSESLAT results, and classroom performance. Intervention is carried out through small group instruction and after school support. D. Long Term Since our Long Term ELLs seem to have a large amount of difficulty with reading comprehension and academic writing, these areas have become the focus of this academic year. During the day, these students receive academic language development with a focus on vocabulary. E. Former ELLs Within the first two years after ELLs have tested 'commanding' on the NYSESLAT, they receive integrated ENL/subject area services for 90 minutes per week to ensure academic achievement. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELLs-SWDs use instructional strategies and materials to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English Language development. Teachers of ELLs-SWDs include in their lesson planning: differentiation of questions; accountable talk prompts; writing with support prompts and language frames. Useful research-based instructional strategies that are used for ELLs-SWDs to accelerate English Language development incorporate reviewing previously taught material; checking for understanding of new material; providing artifacts and hands-on activities; organizing cooperative groups; small group instruction; setting clear expectations for lesson objectives; building on background knowledge; teaching cognates; step by step guided practice and modeling; and explicit instruction. Other strategies used through the four language learning modalities are as follows: • Interactive read- alouds • Multifaceted and intensive vocabulary instruction • Deconstruct/ reconstruct of text • Shared writing • Explicit real world connections • Language experience approach for writing • Writing process • Text analysis • Review of foundational skills • Buddy system • Total Physical Response The materials that teachers of ELLs-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English Language development consist of video/audio technology; computer programs (I-ready); Ready Gen for grades K-5, Code X for grades 6-8, EngageNY for grades K-8; and Wilson Fundations/ Orton Gillingham for grades K-8. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The goal in our school is to ensure that all our students achieve academically, especially that our ELL-SWDs achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency in the least restrictive environment. In order to fulfill this goal, our school has constructed a School Implementation Team (SIT) whose members obtain a variety of specialties and experiences. The main role of the team at the beginning of the school year is to review student IEP’s as well as their data and create a flexible program for each student that provides the student access to the general education curriculum in the least restrictive environment as well as strategies for ELLs. Most of our students’ schedule vary between services in a week such as ICT (integrated collaborated 1  teaching), as well as SETTS (special education teacher support services). Once students are flexibly programmed, they are progress monitored every 6 to 8 weeks to evaluate the effectiveness of their flexible schedule and adapt depending on the needs of the student. It is also a school-wide practice that all general education and special education teachers meet within their grades to discuss curriculum and instruction in order to ensure that all students have access to the general education curriculum. Teachers also plan effective instruction by designing lessons which incorporate the principles of UDL as well as differentiated instruction and tasks. The ENL teachers in the building are also a vital resource for both the general and special education teachers by providing instructional strategies they can use to support ELL-SWDs. The SIT team does analysis of IEPs to review services provided to students. Based on the analysis, we make recommendations using flexible programming. A couple of students are being recommended for the least restrictive environment with ICT provided for either ELA/Math if needed based on classroom assessments. Teachers have also been provided with professional development and will continue to be supported with differentiated instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All of our ELLs receive support through several intervention programs, such as, AIS, after school, Saturday academies, and i-Ready. AIS is offered for literacy in both English and Spanish for ELLs in grades K-5. After school programs are offered for science, social studies, ELA and math. ELLs of all levels are invited to participate. i-Ready is a computer-based diagnostic program implemented in grades K-8 in English for literacy and math. Our SWDs-ELLs receive support and services from our service providers, they use the Goal Book which gives strategic interventions using the UDL framework and CCLS. As a support to transitioning ELLs who have reached proficiency, teachers provide in-class support through differentiated instruction to ensure that students are meeting/exceeding grade level standards. Based on data from school, local, and state assessments interventions programs have been designed such as after school which are strategy specific to the needs of the student(s). Also the RTI team, will be providing teachers supports in developing Tier 1 action plans which are targeted specifically for the needs of the student. Teachers are also being trained in Orton Gillingham and a variety of web based intervention programs are being used such as I-Ready, RAZ KIDS, etc. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For upcoming school year, most classes will implement the side-by side model, alternating teachers in the targeted language. Implementation of the Common Core and the curriculum's (Ready Gen, Engage NY, and Code-X) will be continued to further support our students. We are also planning to use an Academic Toolkit to support both our Long Term ELLs and former ELLs as a more targeted academic vocabulary intervention. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None of our programs or services have been discontinued at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLS are afforded equal access to all school programs provided. These include: academic after school programs, Saturday Academies, art clubs, theatre, choir, debate teams, and sports. These programs not only provide students with opportunities for academic progress, but also social and emotional development. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support ELLs i-Ready, Time for Kids, Attanasio & Associates’ Language Proficiency Intervention Kit, and New York Coach Supporting the Standards. The following web-based programs are used to support ELLs: Scholastic, BeBop, Reading A-Z.com, BrainPop, BrainPop Jr., BrainPop ESL. Other instructional materials include SmartBoard interactive activities and teacher created materials. 2  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In both Dual Language and ENL programs, home language support is assessed through DRA in Spanish, the ELE, and teacher created assessments. Based on the data, a HLA teacher provides explicit language instruction to the whole class. In addition, HLA support is provided through the content areas. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels by following NYS CCLS aligned curriculums. The curriculums followed include: Engage NY, Ready Gen, and Code-X. In addition, the school uses Targets of Measurement and Language Progressions to align instruction to ELLs' ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In the spring, in preparation for the upcoming school year, parents/guardians and perspective students are invited to attend an informational workshop. Our teachers mainly in K-2, Assistant Principal, Special Education Providers, ENL teachers and Parent Coordinator welcome families at the entrance of the building and guided them through the main hallway to an inviting display and bulletin boards. Specifically, they are shown the communication board used by our parent coordinator throughout the year to reflect monthly updates. Then, they are escorted into the cafeteria, where light refreshments are offered. During this meeting, we present the programs offered in our school and citywide, contact information and procedures in place to help maintain a strong home-school relationship. Also, parents use this opportunity to ask questions and discuss topics amongst one another in a comfortable atmosphere. During the orientation, possible ways for them to participate throughout the year in decision making, and other activities that will support their child’s learning (such as school trips, celebrations, classroom helper, etc.) are discussed. During the summer, we offer another workshop to welcome the newly enrolled students and their parents to join our school community, hosted by the Kindergarten teachers, Assistant Principal, Special Education Teacher, ENL teachers and Parent Coordinator. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We did not offer language electives during the year. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? A. In all program models, ELLs and EPs are integrated all day with the exception of entering and emerging ELLs who receive standalone ENL instruction. The program models and specifications are as follows: Dual Language (K-2) • 50/50 side-by-side model • Alternates between two classrooms every other day • 2 teachers in separate classrooms 3  o One teaching English(Common Branch license and Bilingual Extension) o One teaching Spanish (bilingual license) • All subjects taught in both languages • Lessons are continued from previous day • Partner teachers work closely with one another in planning • Simultaneously Emergent literacy is taught in both languages • Cluster teachers may teach in either English or Spanish ICT Dual Language Self Contained (K-2) • 50/50 self-contained model • Alternate between two languages every other day • 2 teachers in 1 classroom (one having a certification in Special Education) o One teaching English(common branch license and bilingual extension) o One teaching Spanish (bilingual licence) • All subjects taught in both languages • Lessons are continued from previous day • Partner teachers work closely with one another in planning • Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously in both languages • Cluster teachers may teach in either English or Spanish Dual Language Self Contained (3rd Grade) • 60% English 40% Spanish self-contained • 1 teacher (Common Branch license with Bilingual Extension) • ELA is taught in English • Math is taught 2 periods in Spanish and the remaining periods in English • Science and social studies are taught in Spanish • Home Language Arts in Spanish content through social studies literature and/or HLA teacher provides explicit Spanish instruction • Grade teachers work closely with one another in planning • Cluster teachers teach in English or Spanish ICT Dual Language Self Contained (3rd Grade) • 60% English 40% Spanish self-contained • 2 teachers in one classroom o One teaching English(Common Branch license and Bilingual extension or Common Branch only) o One teaching English/Spanish (Special Education with Bilingual extension or Special Education only) • ELA is taught in English • Math is taught 3 periods in English and 2 periods in Spanish • Science and Social Studies are taught in Spanish • Home Language Arts in Spanish through social studies literature and/or HLA teacher provides explicit Spanish instruction • Partner teachers and grade teachers work closely with one another in planning 4  • Cluster teachers teach in English or Spanish Dual Language (4-5) Departmentalized • 60% English 40% Spanish • 2 teacher (one teacher with a common branch license with Bilingual Extension or/and the other common branch licence) • 2 classrooms • ELA is taught solely in English • 3 periods of Math is taught in English and 2 periods in Spanish • Science and Social Studies are taught in solely in Spanish • Home Language Arts in Spanish content through social studies literature and/or HLA teacher provides explicit Spanish instruction • Grade teachers work closely with one another in planning • Cluster teachers teach in English or Spanish ICT Dual Language (4-5) • 60% English 40% Spanish • 2 teachers in one classroom o One teaching English(Common Branch license and Bilingual extension or Common Branch only) o One teaching English/Spanish (Special Education with Bilingual extension or Special Education only) • ELA is taught in English • 3 periods of Math are taught in English and 2 periods in Spanish • Science and Social Studies are taught in Spanish • Home Language Arts in Spanish through social studies literature and/or HLA teacher provides explicit Spanish instruction • Partner teachers work closely with one another in planning • Cluster teachers teach in English or Spanish • Dual Language Middle School (6th)Departmentalized/Block • 70% English/ 30% Spanish • Different teachers for each core content area with content area license • ESOL teacher integrated ENL/Standalone ENL • 60 minute block per content area • English and Spanish alternate per content areas 60% English/40%Spanish (Science and Math) • Social Studies in Spanish • HLA through Social Studies literature ICT Dual Language Middle School (6th)Departmentalized/Block • 70% English/ 30% Spanish • One Special Education teacher and one General Education teacher with content area license • ESOL teacher integrated ENL/Standalone ENL 5  • 60 minute block per content area • English and Spanish alternate per content areas 60% English/40%Spanish (Science and Math) • Social Studies 100% in Spanish • HLA through Social Studies literature Dual Language Middle School (7th and 8th ) Departmentalized/Block • 70% English/ 30% Spanish • Different teachers for each core content area with content area license • ESOL teacher integrated ENL/Standalone ENL • 60 minute block per content area • English and Spanish Alternation in Math • English and Spanish alteration in 7th grade Science • 40% Social Studies in Spanish • HLA through social studies literature ICT Dual Language Middle School (7th and 8th ) Departmentalized/Block • 70% English/ 30% Spanish • One Special Education teacher and one General Education teacher with content area license • ESOL teacher integrated ENL/Standalone ENL • 60 minute block per content area • English and Spanish alternation in Math • English and Spanish alteration in 7th grade Science • 30% Social Studies in Spanish • HLA through social studies literature B. In grades K-2, all core content is taught in both English and Spanish language. The days alternate English and Spanish and lessons are continuous from the previous day. In grades 3-5, social studies and science are taught in Spanish, math is taught in English and Spanish, and ELA and HLA are taught in English and Spanish respectively. In grades 6-8, math, social studies and science are taught in both English and/or Spanish. ELA is in English. C. In K-2, instruction is not separated, all content areas are instructed in both English and Spanish. In grades 3-8, the language of instruction is divided during the week by content areas. D. Emergent literacy is taught in both languages simultaneously. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is offered for all ELL personnel at the school in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. The professional development plan for the school year includes: teacher rounds, Early Teaching Matters, and in-house literacy and mathematics professional developments. Teacher rounds will be led by experienced teachers Ms. Cabral (bilingual science), Ms. Selby (bilingual special education) and Ms. Tejada (mathematics) that will organize inter-visitations and professional developments that focus on best practices to support our ELL population and other subgroups. Early Teaching Matters will be conducted by Xania Foster, for teachers of students in K-3 to support strategies in guided 6  reading and small group instruction. In grades K-2, teachers have the support of the Universal Literacy Coach, Susana Moreira, who will conduct professional developments for teachers based on classroom observations and data. Similarly, grades 3-5 and 6-8 each have a literacy consultant, Daria Rigney (Early Teaching Matters) and Helen Murray that will support their teachers. Finally, grades K-2 (Ross Linegar), 3-5 (Susan Midlarsky) have a mathematics consultant that will also lead in-house professional developments for best practices that target all subgroups. A calendar is created by the principal secretary, Marti Flores, who has a calendar with all in-house professional developments. Additionally, teachers are sent to outside professional development given by different DOE agencies and private consultants. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2, our assistant principals share professional developments offered by DELLSS and Fordham RBERN to all teachers. After participating at the professional developments, teachers keep records of their agendas and are required to provide a professional development feedback form that is kept in the main office with the principal secretary, Marti Flores. Teachers who participate in off-site professional development turn-key information to their colleagues during weekly grade and/or content area team meetings and/or professional development on Mondays. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Within the first two weeks of school parents/guardians are provided with an orientation. This orientation provides an overview of grade expectations and standards that need to be met across all content areas. Parents are encouraged and welcomed every Tuesday after school (2:20- 3:00pm) to discuss the progress and any concerns that they may have about their child. Teachers, often communicate with parents by providing feedback about the on-going assessments given all year around in all subject areas. The ENL teachers support open communication with parents and provide them with an ENL Progress Report in English and in Spanish which analyzes and provides them with an overall performance grade in oral, reading, listening and writing modalities. This report provides a teacher reflection and recommendation. Parents and students are encouraged to reflect and comment on what steps will be taken to meet or exceed standards that are being measured. The bilingual and ENL teachers contact parents of ELLs to schedule their individual meetings, in the language of their choice, during Family Engagement time to inform them of the goals of the program, results on language proficiency assessments and to discuss the language development needs of each child. The individual meeting is conducted in the parents' preferred language or through NYC DOE translation services unit, if needed. The teacher and parents review the previous year's NYSESLAT score, ELL baseline and midline, and in-class teacher observations and assessments to review the results and track the students' language development progress in all content areas. Based on the results, teachers along with the parents and students create goals for further language development. Teachers supply parents with NYSED Parent's Backpack Guide to the Common Core State Standards and the Parents' Bill of Rights for New York State English Language Learners. Teachers keep track of attendance with an attendance log that is kept in their respective classrooms or offices. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The primary role of the parent coordinator is to serve as facilitator for parents and the school community. Assistance should also be provided to parents to locate information and services related to immigration, free or low cost legal services and assist with referrals for students of concern. The parent coordinator communicates with parents in person, by phone or in 7  writing. The parent coordinator provides services in Spanish and English; if another language other than English or Spanish is required, proper translation is provided by the translation and interpretation unit. The involvement of parents in our school is strong. Parents participate in numerous ways which include English classes, Nutrition workshops, Support Groups, Immigration forums and volunteers. English Instruction: this year English class instruction is provided to our ELL parents on Saturdays from 8 am to 1 p.m. Support Group: Parents congregate and discuss various topics ranging from: student peer pressure, family conflicts understanding curriculum, problem solving strategies. Immigration Forums: We are very much committed to supporting and helping to meet the needs of our Latino Community. Periodic forums are held at the school with the support of the Mexican Coalition for the Empowerment of Youth and Families. ENL and Special Education teams collaborate and facilitate a Family night event for the parents and their children twice a year. Included in this event for grades k-8 are educational games, art projects, sports, food and raffles. This opportunity allows for the school and home to bond over child focused activities. Annual individual meetings with parents of ENL students or parent outreach logs are kept by the teachers. Parents have to sign in when they meet with teachers. Teachers also keep a call log when parents are called and the reason for the call is documented. If necessary, letters are sent home to individual parents to discuss academic progress of the child and a meeting is scheduled if other methods of communication fail. Language of communication will depend on the parent choice either in English or Spanish. Rare cases parents who speak a language other than English or Spanish often bring someone who can translate for them in English, if not these parents prefer English as a method of communication. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dr. Sergio Caceres, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS/IS 218 School DBN: 09X218 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dr. Serge Caceres Title Principal Ircania Stylianou Assistant Principal Zeneth Morales Parent Coordinator Luisa Arias ENL/Bilingual Teacher Catalina Alvarado Parent Brenda Dos Santos/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Tracey Igwe/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Susan Moreira/ULIT Susan Moreira/ULIT Coach Coach Leticia Ojeda School Counselor Leticia Rosario-Rodriguez Kristy Dela Cruz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Kristy Dela Cruz Kathleen Daniel Other HLA/Teacher Mary Seminario Other IEP/Teacher Victor Gilbes Other Data Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/2018 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/18 06/28/2018 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09x218 School Name: 218 Superintendent: Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Marta Viera Principal's Secretary No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. We use a plethora of tools to gather information about our school community. At the time of enrollment, parents respond to interview questions that are presented in their native language by a licensed pedagogue. In Part II of the HLIS, these questions provide us with the preferred language of communication orally and written. Since we are a Dual Language School, communication to parents is automatically given in English and Spanish. In addition, ATS reports such as the BIOS are aligned to the original Home Language Identification Survey to ensure accurate and direct communication amongst all staff. Currently, we have four dominant languages in our school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Our Dual Language School delivers all oral and written communication in English and Spanish. When specified on the HLIS, the school communicates orally and in written form in the preferred language. The languages that parents have indicated as a preferred language is Spanish and English. Spanish: 1030 Spanish: 66.88 Spanish: 1032 Spanish: 67.01 English: 473 English: 30.71 English: 476 English: 30.91 Bengali: 26 Bengali: 1.69 Bengali: 24 Bengali: 1.56 Soninke: 9 Soninke: 0.58 Soninke: 6 Soninke: 0.39 French: 1 French: 0.06 French: 1 French: 0.06 Russian: 1 Russian: 0.06 Russian: 1 Russian: 0.06 66.88 30.71 1.69 1032 476 24 67.01 30.91 1.56 Spanish English Bengali 1030 473 26 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Have none. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 08/07/2017 09/07/2017 09/29/2017 Annually, school documents that require translation are distributed throughout the year to our school families. Many methods of communication are offered to all parents in English and Spanish, unless stated otherwise on the ATS report. Some of these methods are orientations, conferences, monthly calendars regarding parent activities, brochures, postings throughout the school, letters, conduct handbook, agendas, testing dates, parent 2 Ms. Flores is fully bilingual and she can translate flawlessly from English to Spanish and from Spanish to English. When she encounters a word that it is difficult to translate, a translation program is used on-line, such as googletranslate and onlinedictionary.com. For other languages, i.e., French, Bengali, Arabic, and Soninke, she utilizes DOE Translation Unit. 12/22/2017 10/31/2017 11/30/2017  information meetings regarding curriculum and support. And DOE communication as well. Communication sent home on a monthly basis: School Calendar of events; and curricula Newsletters. Welcoming Letter to Parents 01/31/2018 02/28/2018 03/29/2018 04/30/2018 05/31/2018 06/22/2018 09/07/2017 09/29/2017 10/31/2017 11/30/2017 12/22/2017 01/31/2018 02/28/2018 03/29/2018 04/30/2018 05/31/2018 06/22/2018 08/07/2017 DOE Communications 09-07/2017-06/26/2018 Ms. Flores is fully bilingual and she can translate flawlessly from English to Spanish and from Spanish to English. When she encounters a word that it is difficult to translate, a translation program is used on-line, such as googletranslate and onlinedictionary.com. For other languages, i.e., French, Bengali, Arabic, and Soninke, she utilizes DOE Translation Unit. Letter sent in English and Spanish to parents. DOE usually provides communication in all designated languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Some face-to-face meetings that happen throughout the school year include parent-teacher conferences that occur (September, November, March, and May), mandated Tuesdays parent-teacher meetings, Coffee with the Principal Meeting, which takes place once a month, guidance councilor meetings for high school preparation, Middle School Application process, intervention, 08/07/2017 09/07/2017 09/29/2017 10/31/2017 11/30/2017 12/22/2017 01/31/2018 02/28/2018 03/29/2018 04/30/2018 05/31/2018 interpretation service(s)? Due to the fact that we are a Fully Dual Language School, 87% of our Parents speak Spanish and 98% of our Staff are bilingual, they provide the translation for parents. For those parents that do not speak Spanish or English, we call the translation unit and have the conference via the phone with the translator. 3  academics, referrals, crisis, DREAM;SHSI. etc, phone calls from attendance teacher and general office, workshops for parents by teachers and parent coordinator. Parent-Teacher Conferences 06/22/2018 AND Every Tuesdays during Parental Engagement Time for those parents that come. Parent-Teacher Conferences are: 09/28/2017 11/30/2017 03/15/2018 05/10/2018 Appointment with Parents 09-07-2017-06-01-2018 Parental Engagement Time 09-07-2017 - 06/01/2018 Due to the fact that we are a dual language school, our teachers do their own translation. For those parents that do not speak either language, teachers arrange DOE translator via the phone. Teachers provide the translation to parents during Face-to-Face meetings Every Tuesdays from 2:20 to 3:35 pm, parents are welcome to visit their children's teachers to discuss academic progress. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Due to the fact that we are a fully Dual Language School, our staff is bilingually certified and Speak English and Spanish and can do their own translation. For those families that do not Speak English or Spanish, we utilize the DOE Translation Unit and provide translation via the phone with a licensed translator. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our school is a fully Dual Language school and the staff speak English and Spanish providing our parents with the translation needed. For those parents that do not speak English or Spanish, the staff know to call the DOE Translation Unit to acquire a licensed translator. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 4  Our school fulfills all requirements listed above by using the website of Rules and Policies to access multiple translation documents and post them at the entrance of the school and provide additional information with the parent coordinator. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys are given after orientations and meetings with parents. Parent involvement on the Leadership Team and access through parent coordinator and PA are also pathways to receive feedback from parents. 5 
