2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X223 School Name: THE LABORATORY SCHOOL OF FINANCE AND TECHNOLOGY X223 Principal: RAMON GONZALEZ 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 320700010223 6-12 360 East 145 th street 7185858202 Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Laboratory School of Finance and technology X223 School Number (DBN): 07X223 7182927435 Fax: Phone Number: Dr. Ramon Gonzalez rgonzal@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Dr. Ramon Gonzalez Courtney Summer Rosalie Perez Ambar Hernandez SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Joanna Argullo Anthony Ramirez Genesis Castillo John Garibaldi Geographical District: 07 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue RAlvare4@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7187426500 Phone Number: 7187426548 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776/718-741-8895 (718) 828-6280   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Dr. Ramon Gonzalez Courtney Summer Rosalie Perez Sumaya Castillo Genesis Castillo Anthony Ramirez Alfonsina Jimenez Ambar Hernandez Patricia Gomez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ PA   Emily Meyers Teresa Medina Violeta Guerra Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ UFT Member/ PA Member/PA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to provide an engaging, rigorous academic program within a supportive and nurturing environment. We seek to expose our students to information technology and global commerce and to prepare them to be successful in a rapidly changing world. We believe that learning becomes more meaningful when it is purposeful. Through active engagement, project-based learning, and encouragement we will cultivate self-discipline and self esteem amongst the members of our community while at the same time foster respect and consideration for others.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Laboratory School of Finance and Technology (X223), is a community school located in the South Bronx. Our school serves approximately 700 students in the Mott Haven neighborhood of the South Bronx and is in the third year of full scale expansion of over 700 students grades 6-12 in September 2018. Approximately 75% of our students are Latino and 24% are African American. Ninety-two percent of our students qualify for free and reduced price lunches. Even though our school is impacted by poverty we have created a community of excellence. As a result we have received national recognition for our work including the Intel School of Distinction Award in 2010, the Sloan Public Service Award in 2011, and an award from the National Center for Urban School Transformation in 2012. In 2017 and 2018 we have a 92% graduation rate. Founded in 2003, MS 223 has introduced a number of innovative programs to improve the education of our students. These programs include a school-wide economy, a highly successful dual-language program, the Summer Bridge Arts Institute, Expanded Day, PROSE, host Learning Partners site, and Teacher Leader programs. This year MS 223 will be named the Laboratory School of Finance and Technology X223. The Lab School will partner College Bound Initiative (CBI), iMENTOR, AList, National Pregnancy Prevention Program, TEALS, Lincoln Center, Campaign 44 and the National College Advising Corps. These programs are meant to support our students college aspirations with college counseling, SAT and ACT preparation, mentoring and tracking students across the application and submission process and career development. The Lab School will also continue to partner with Arete Education Inc., Urban Tech., Blue Engine, Junior Achievement, Matisse and Hayden Foundations, Teachers College Readers and Writers Project, Yankees Foundation, US Military Academy at West Point, and New York University. These partnerships support our students by creating Expanded Day opportunities, out of school internships, in school job placement, and enrichment opportunities. The partnerships also help to produce small instructional group class ratios and tutoring. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We service a large percent of homeless students or double up students due to the numerous homeless shelters within the schools zone. This population tends to have resource needs and requires additional follow up on ensuring that children have basic necessities and access to expanded day programming. We also serve about 22% of our population with special education services, including self contained and ICT. We also have about 10% of our students that are current ELLs and serve their needs through both ENL and Dual Language service delivery models. Both of these populations require a teaching staff and curriculum that needs strong collaboration for the benefit of students and to challenge them at high levels. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Framework for Great Schools The primary area of focus in 2017-18 was around teacher development in order to drive student achievement through improving teacher collaboration, rigorous instruction, and supportive environment. We leveraged the data we accumulated from our Danielson observations to support professional development around our three lowest performing areas. The three areas were questioning and discussion, assessment and student engagement. Throughout the entire year we implemented numerous PD opportunities to focus on this area along with observations. We also created additional opportunities for teacher collaboration during the school day. 0  For 2018-19 we will continue to focus on teach development with the addition of family-community ties. We believe that the children of families who are engaged do better than those who are disengaged. We will use the school survey to improve parent and teacher relations. We will also coordinate with our Expanded Day partners to create once a month parent workshops on teen issues such as bullying, suicide, cyber-bullying, mental health and student to student relationships. Finally our parent coordinator will shift hours so we have two late night sessions so parents have an opportunity to attend events at the school. We will also continue to evaluate our school culture and community to ensure that we have the most optimal environment for learning. We will identify more ways to leverage our status as a secondary school to support students at different levels of their academic and social emotional growth. We are also committed to energizing our families to be a part of our learning community and volunteer their time to improve our school and serve our students. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X223 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 684 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 26 26 4 13 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 94.2% % Reduced Lunch 8.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.1% 80.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 15.26 6% 38% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 48.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 95% 2% 81.1% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 106 108 92.8% 3.1% 21.3% 17.8% 0.6% 0.3% 4 34% 5.9 47.8% 55% 81% 58% N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Student performance in ELA is an area of growth for our school, with 17% Level 1, 34% Level 2, 26% Level 3, and 22% Level 4 proficiency on the 2017-18 state exams. Our QR in 2016-17 and our PPOs draw attention to the need for multiple entry points for diverse learners and the need to continue to support students with disabilities and English language learners to meet rigorous grade level expectations. 2. In 2018-19, we will place great emphasis on developing strong assessment systems and each core course teacher developed an end of year performance task aligned to the PBAT rubric but normed for the appropriate grade level. We know that strong student writing is the result of reading and preparation. By August of 2018, our graduation rate to 92% and hope to match that data with the class of 2019. We need to continue to build a culture of writing with evidence and to persuade. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase of students reaching proficiency as measured by NY Performance Standards Consortium rubric. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Teachers will familiarize themselves with their content specific rubrics. Teaching Staff Teachers will identify units of study when they will implement full PBAT or Pre-BAT task and design or refine performance tasks. Teaching Staff Students will be assessed three times a year for their writing skills in their subject areas: the fall baseline on demand, process piece with their teacher and spring end of year on demand. Groupings and goals for bottom third, SWD and ELLs driven by student needs, performance data and teacher observation. Teaching Staff Teachers will use scaffolded approaches to reading and writing and confer with students, keeping records on status, support provided and next steps during the task completion process. Teaching Staff Teachers will use tracking tools to identify strengths and areas for growth for students during the PBAT oriented tasks across subject areas. Inquiry groups will identify subject specific strategies to support student success and completion of tasks. Teachers will annotate samples of student work for reflection and as models for future groups of teachers and students. Teacher Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Coaches, APs Coaches, APs Coaches, APs August 2018-September 2018 September 2018 through November2018 October 2018 through April 2019 Teachers, Coaches, APs Coaches, APs September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family Engagement workshops led four times a year September 15th Team leaders and parent coordinator Focus on student data and goal setting November 16th Team leaders and parent coordinator Focus on leveraging family culture and background for student self esteem 4  March 15th Team leaders and parent coordinator Focus on student data and goal setting June 9th Team leaders and parent coordinator College and career readiness Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Math and ELA coaches Training rate per session Teachers College Readers and Writers Program coach and services Supplies 6th grade will receive two additional classes for a total of 10 periods 9th grade will receive a writing seminar for one additional period three days a day Title III -- Reading and Writing Interventions for ELLs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase of students reaching proficiency as measured by NYC Performance Standards Consortium rubric. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Content specific student Performance Based Assessment Tasks Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to our School Performance Dashboard, High School student attendance has dipped slightly from 92% in 2015-16 to 90% 2016-17. Students with 90% attendance or higher also dipped from 77% to 71%. Our goal is to both increase the number of high school students attending school overall and increasing the percentage of students attending consistently. 2. Regarding the Framework Element of Supportive Environment, strengths up to this point include student relationships and student safety. According to the 2018 School Survey, over 90% of students feel safe in class and in common areas. Opportunities for possible growth include supporting students in re entry to school after gaps in attendance and supporting students that fall behind academically to keep them engaged. 3. Policies to support the whole child include, 3 periods per week around social emotional growth and development with the support of College Access: Research and Action, College Bound Initiative, National College Advising Corps, iMentor, and Single Shepherds. Services are oriented at supporting students in grades 9-12 identify personal strengths and interests and develop a plan for post secondary opportunities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in student attendance with a focus on 9 - 12, as measured by attendance reports. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Guidance team will identify chronically absent students from 2016-17 school year. Chronically Absent Students September 2018 Guidance Team, CSD, Parent Coordinator Grade Level Teams will meet with students and families to develop action plans and goals. Specific attention to overage or undercredited students and academic an attendance plans. Grade Level teams will consult with families and monitor progress of Chronically Absent and monitor new cases of 407s and warning sign students in first term. Chronically Absent Students and Families Chronically Absent Students and Families October 2018 through November 2018 December 2018 through February 2019 Guidance Team, CSD, Parent Coordinator Guidance Team, CSD Mid year meetings will occur with all targeted students; new cases will be added and cases with improved outcomes will be monitored less intensively. Interventions will include parent outreach, home visits, positive recognition, mentoring touches and celebrations to mark successes and progress. Chronically Absent Students and Families February 2019 through March 2019 Guidance Team, CSD, Parent Coordinator Chronically Absent Students and Families May 2019 through June 2019 Guidance Team, CSD, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Outreach and recruitment for expanded learning opportunities and the importance of daily attendance. This is led by our CBO partner and our Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 7  ELT Grant Funding -- CBO Support Title 1 Funding -- Supplies Tax Levy Funding -- Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in student attendance with a focus on 9 - 12, as measured attendance reports Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Based on our most recent Quality Review Feedback and the NYC School Survey, some of the strengths of our school include: ● In order to ensure cohesive and coherent instructional plans across content areas and grades, teachers collaboratively analyze student work and discuss curricula as well as successful teaching strategies that can be replicated across classrooms, thus ensuring that all students have access to cognitively engaging tasks. ● Retreats for collaborative learning and reflection by staff. ● Principal led monthly New Teacher meetings to discuss effective academic and social emotional practices and engage in text-based discussions, through the New Teacher Book Club that result in a collaborative learning community with the principal at the helm of this process. ● In SY 2017-18 92% of teachers agree or strongly agree that teachers in my school work together on teams to improve their instructional practice. 2. Based on our Quality Review Feedback and NYC School Survey, there is room for growth in:  Ensuring that all teachers incorporate extensions of curricula for all groups of students, such as students with disabilities and English language learners who struggle in maintaining a rigorous trajectory in their learning.  67% of teachers agree that the principal, teachers, and staff collaborate to make this school run effectively. As a result of this data, we feel that increased time for collaboration between staff members will help to ensure an increase in community and will create an atmosphere where all staff is working towards continuous improvement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in positive responses on the NYC School Survey teacher section measuring collaboration. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will set SMART goals aligned to the Framework for Teaching based on self identified areas for growth using available data. Mid year and end of year check ins to show evidence and make adjustments to goals. Teaching Staff PROSE proposal in order to split professional assignments to allow teachers to additional meeting periods for collaborative work. Teacher Professional Development Committee will identify priorities in consultation with the principal and staff surveys. Teaching Staff PD Team Teachers will engage in 3 hours of self directed professional learning outside of the school day to support their needs and goals for themselves and their students. Teachers will have opportunities to work with coaches and consultants and access to PD opportunities from affiliated partners. Teaching Staff Professional learning will be chunked into differentiated modules around a theme or FfT area for growth. Teachers will usually identify their own preferences and have an opportunity to try the new strategy. All modules will commence with an opportunity to share their work with colleagues. Teaching Staff All teaches will be a part of a content team inquiry project over the year taking a close dive into student and teacher work products around a problem of practice based on the Data Wise Inquiry Process. Teacher Teams Grade teams will analyze NYSESLAT data, receive PD on reading and implementing IEPs, and will select individual students for case studies and goal setting. Teacher Teams September-October 2018, February-March 2019 and May-June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018, February 2019, and June 2019 September 2018 through June 2019 September 2018 through May 2019 September 2018 through May 2019 September 2018 through May 2019 Principal and APs Coaches, Principal, APs Principal and APs Principal and APs Principal and APs Coaches, principal and APs Grade team leaders, Special Education coordinator, PD team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will host quarterly meetings with families to share instructional strategies and ways families can support student learning at home. This will be facilitated by teachers with coordination from the Parent Coordinator and the SLT. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP for training rate per session Title I SWP for 8 periods X $40 X 40 weeks for mentoring Title I SWP: HQT Funds Title I SWP: Assistant Principal Salary Title I SWP: Science Coach Title I SWP: June Planning Retreat C4E: Math Coach FSF: Inquiry Teams FSF: Professional Development Team FSF: Special Education Team Meetings FSF: Collaborative Periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 5% increase in positive responses on a school based survey measuring collaboration. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School created survey based off NYC school survey question Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As the school has expanded over the last four years, the staff to admin ratio has increased. According to the principal 360 degree assessment given to staff in Spring 2018, teachers want more leadership roles and transparency on how those roles are obtained. We have also noticed that the increase in staff size which has doubled in 4 years has made it difficult for staff to directly relate to the principal due to the size and access to the principal. These results suggest that school leadership needs to find opportunities to increase staff recognition, relationships, and leadership roles. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher leaders will receive a 10% increase in favorable ratings from their peers as measured by role related surveys of their performance. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Role specific goals will be developed with and for teachers who will be given additional roles in the school community. Professional development will be offered to a selected group of teachers focusing on leadership skills. Teacher leaders will develop feedback surveys for midyear to provide to colleagues they work with. They will review that data with a supervisor and identify next steps from the feedback to improve their service to colleagues. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Leaders Sep. 2018 - Jan 2019 Principal, APs and Teacher Leaders Teacher Leaders Nov 2018 - April 2019 Principal, APs and Teacher Leaders Monthly teacher leader meetings with Principal to collaboratively think through challenges and celebrate successes. Teacher Leaders Parents will be invited to selected instructional meetings and will offer feedback. Parents Nov 2018 - June 2019 Nov 2018 -June 2019 Principal SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher leaders will facilitate outreach to families for school related events and updates and coordinate with parent volunteers, PA and SLT representatives. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for leadership roles Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, teacher leaders will receive a 5% increase in favorable ratings from their peers as measured by role related surveys of their performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mid Year Check In Sheet with Teacher Smart Goals Feedback forms established by PD Committee Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. We have looked at previous years of data from the annual School Survey and found that the areas of safety, expectations, communication, and academic expectations could be improved over three years with targeted intervention strategies. In terms fo attendance at school events, attendance is consistently high in the November 2017 and the March 2018 Conferences, with attendance over 80%. 2. Our challenge is to connect with families beyond those dates. We have identified some opportunities to connect with families this coming year. Families have expressed on the 2017 School Survey that they want to be more connected to the school. 46 Percent noted that they had been asked to volunteer for school related activities. There is the ongoing challenge of finding the types of events and activities that will help build a deeper connection with families and respect their obligations and schedules. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parent satisfaction with volunteer opportunities will increase by 15% based on the NYC School Survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Opportunities to volunteer will be identified with descriptions and timeframes. Parent Volunteers Families have access to opportunities via multiple methods of communication including the Fall Open House, monthly family newsletter, school web page and PA Meetings in the fall to register for opportunities. Parent Volunteers Event sign ups will be reviewed and additional outreach and follow up will be made for opportunities with low registration. Parent Volunteers Volunteers are provided with reminders and trainings if needed prior to volunteer opportunities. Parent volunteers August 2018 -September 2018 September 2018 -October 2018 October 2018 -November 2018 October 2018 - June 2019 School will recognize all volunteers and provide special recognition to parents who go above and beyond in service to the school and children. Parent Volunteers May 2019 -June 2019 Specific workshops will be developed for parents of English Language Learners and Student with Disabilities about the college process and career readiness. Parents of ELLs and SWDs November 2018 - April 2019 Parent Coordinator, PA Board, SLT Parent Coordinator, PA Board, SLT Parent Coordinator, PA Board, SLT Parent Coordinator, PA Board, SLT Parent Coordinator, PA Board, SLT, Principal Special Education Coordinator, Dual Language Coordinator, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our September Open House and ongoing communications to families will include both opportunities for volunteering and progress toward meeting our goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  Provide curriculum maps, volunteer sign in sheet, meeting agenda, and other support materials Compensatory time for Parent Coordinator to lead meeting Food and parent reimbursement Expand SLT and create parent council with stipends Thank you cards and certificates for parent volunteers Supplies and materials for community read day and incentives to encourage parent participation Trainers for parent workshops both CBO based and via Per Session Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 parent satisfaction with volunteering opportunities will increase by 7 percent based on a survey conducted midyear. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign in sheets for parent volunteers at events through fall and spring term. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Reading below grade level based on Fountas and Pinnell Assessments and DRP. Math test scores below level based on end of unit plans and previous NY State Exams Diagnostic, Mid year and end of Year assessment Diagnostic, Mid year and end of Year assessment Section sheet data, classroom removals, and report card data Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Word generation vocabulary study and Harvard Book Club reading group. Small group instruction. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day and expanded day. Mastery Sheets for each objective, and after school tutoring and Saturday tutoring graphic organizers, power point, writing flowchart and evidence collection sheet graphic organizers, power point, writing flowchart and evidence collection sheet small group and individual counseling Small group instruction. Small group instruction Small group instruction Small group and 1:1 During school day, expanded day, and Saturday. During school day, expanded day, and Saturday. During school day, expanded day, and Saturday. During school day, expanded day, and Saturday. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 71 students in grades 6-12 on register in July of 2018 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Expanded day programming in mathematics and literacy from 3pm to 5pm, Summer Bridge enrichment focused on independent reading, math performance tasks for the month of July, advisory classes for high school, additional courses for high school students to acquire additional credits to graduate on time, Saturday Academy programming which contains tutoring and an intramural sports league. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Leadership development and opportunities: teacher leader, dean, special ed coordinator, dual language coordinator, testing coordinator, School Leadership Team Chair, mentors, summer teaching positions, CBO partnerships, Leadership retreat. ● Recruitment: Teach For America blast, NY Times advertisement, use of media, interview process, student teacher pipeline, and hiring subs to develop as teachers, and demo lessons. ● Incentivizing teaching: celebrations including 5 year awards, and awards for attendance, financial workshops and seminars 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS).  Professional development: weekly meetings with coach, collaborative planning, quick feedback, using teacher data to craft PD plan, Teachers College PD, mentoring, action research (inquiry), Spanish language scholarship Leadership development and opportunities.   Teacher Led PD Committee designing learning experiences driven by Staff Survey, CEP Goals, FfT Performance and Feedback.  PD Committee will develop modules during the school year around applying new learning to classroom work and plans around assessment, planning, discussion and groupings/differentiation.  Teachers will share findings at the conclusion fo each module with their peers to share ideas, strategies and best practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 1  na 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). na Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). na 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. na 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 689,207 0 12,366.00 0 4,405,027 X X X 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 3  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Laboratory School of Finance and Technology in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Laboratory School of Finance and Technology will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ●providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ●fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ●providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ●sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; ●providing opportunities to parents for volunteering in the school to support their students and the community of learners; ● leveraging school and district resources to support parents and caregivers to help their child succeed at home through workshops and events with partners. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ●actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ●engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ●ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ●support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ●maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ●conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 6  ●provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ●translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ●conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; ●work with CBOs to improve attendance outcomes and strategies and support families with opportunities such as English classes, tax preparation, student employment opportunities and college readiness workshops. The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ●holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ●hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ●encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ●supporting or hosting Family Day events; ●establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ●encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ●providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ●developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ●providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Laboratory School of Finance and Technology in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and 7  programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. School Responsibilities: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum All Children Will Achieve High Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● completing rigorous performance tasks across the curriculum involving, reading, writing and presentation skills from grades 6 through 12. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 8  ● ensuring that families have ample opportunities to participate in the school life of their child through open school days, school events and trips. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; ● maintaining an email system for staff to communicate with families and vice versa. ● providing family access to online grading software that can be accessed by families to track their child's performance and follow up with teachers regarding specific assignments. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● providing family access to online grading software that can be accessed by families to track their child's performance and follow up with teachers regarding specific assignments; ● providing expanded day, Saturday and summer programming to spark student academic and enrichment skills and provide additional time on task for students to prepare for college level work and prevent a skills gap. ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9  Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 0  ● always try my best to learn. 1  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The CS strategy is integrated through several partners to organize the resources of the school and community to support student success. One way the strategy is integrated into academic instruction is through our expanded day initiative and summer extension. Both program address the additional hours of quality instruction necessary to accelerate our students with additional instruction and intervention in reading, writing, and mathematics. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By 2019 all Long Term Absence students will increase their attendance on average by 10% as measured by ATS. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? It is well established that for every 10 days students are absent, one month of school instruction is lost. A 10% increase or 18 days, will increase student achievement by about 2 months. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal CBO Partnership Arete Education Inc iMentor Blue Engine Target Population 700 students in grades 6-12 Academic enrichment, intervention, attendance and leadership 200 students in grades 11-12 college and career readiness 400 students in grades 8-11 college and career readiness By June 2019 all Long Term Absence students will increase their attendance on average by 10% as measured by ATS. By December 2018, 90% of all 11th and 12th grade students will have a 1:1 mentor By June 2019, we will see a 10% improvement in ELA and Math Regents Scores 2  MASA Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment 300 families in grades 6-8 parent engagement By June 2019, increase parent participation in school workshops by 2 Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. $300,000 through 21st century funds Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside X 21st Century SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The school has hired a Community Schools Director to coordinate community and school resources. The CS director will attend cabinet meetings, admin meetings, and CEC meetings to increase resources that will be redirected to students. With the help of the CS, additional support will be provided to special needs students through small class intervention work such as Just Words and Wilson. Additional counselors will be utilized to provide personalized counseling services through a solution-focused model. All students will be expected to attend a 2 hour additional enrichment program from 3 to 5pm that includes book clubs, academic intervention, regents classes and 20 different 3  enrichment activities. Community Forums are established once a month in conjunction with the PA to support family engagement. Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Arete Education Inc,- Expanded day enrichment and intervention services, leadership training, and iMentor- mentoring program focused on 11th and 12th graders College Bound Initiative- college counseling and career development services. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Additional funds are needed to expand the college office, provide additional space is needed to provide college enrichment and CTE resources Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018- June 2019 Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Title III funds will be used to support an after school enrichment learning program for ELLs with English acquisition. This program will support approximately 30 students who are in need of improving their reading and writing skills as indicated by the NYSESLAT. The program will run on Wednesday-Friday from 2:15-4:15 PM. The program will begin in October and run through May. Most of the students in the program are Expanding, long term ELLs. Expanding, transitioning, emerging and entering ELLs in grades 6-12 will be invited to participate, with approximately 8 students per grade. Instruction will be in two groupings based on grade level and be provided by a certified ESL teacher and a bilingual certified instructor. The language of instruction will be English with native language support as needed. This program will run for 25 weeks with 1.5 hour sessions two days a week. (2 teachers X 25 weeks X 1.5 hours @ 60.65 = $4548.75) Funding will also be used to supplement the after school program with instructional materials. The format will be small group work through differentiated interventions such as leveled book study, NewsELA and English 3D to provide additional academic support as a complement to the existing school day program with appropriate level texts and resources in English. These resources will be funded from other sources. Middle school students will work with one teacher and high school teachers will work with another instructor. Appropriately leveled texts will be purchased that are both fiction and nonfiction and are of interest to students. High school students will be supported with writing projects to improve outcomes on performance assessments for core courses as measured by the PBAT rubric. Students will receive adhesive notes to jot down thoughts related to their independent reading texts and composition books to respond to prompts about their reading that will be specifically for the Title III program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Title III funding will be used to support a study group after school, expand upon the work of inquiry teams, and integrate other components such as language objectives and planning and implementation of the ENL and Home Language Standards. Teacher professional development sessions will be held on Mondays once a month from November to May for one and a half hours from 3:45-5:15 PM for a total of 8 sessions. These sessions will follow the mandated Monday professional development sessions for all staff. (9 sessions X 2 hours X 3 teachers @ 60.65 = $3275.10) 6  Part C: Professional Development Topics to be discussed will include a close reading of CCLS and PBAT rubrics and their implications for ELLs (2 sessions), unit planning for ELLs (4 sessions), reflection on the implementation of units and to design subsequent units with the findings in mind (2 sessions). The main resource that will be utilized will be the NYS Bilingual Common Core Progressions for ENL and Home Language Arts. The group will also address next steps for specific students and subgroups in the Title III program to support their English language acquisition and native language support where necessary. The people participating in the group will be an ESL teacher, a bilingual teacher, and two social studies teachers. The ESL teacher and bilingual teacher will participate and be funded through the Title III instructional program. The other teachers also teach classes during the school day that have a high number of ELLs. The target audience for these sessions will be both teachers of ELLs and administrators for each group to support one another to successfully implement and support the Title III program and their ELL students in the current school year and beyond. Supplies would cost 1236 and equipment would cost 1236. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Families of ELLs at MS/HS 223 will receive opportunities to develop their role as their child's most important teacher and advocate. We want families to be able to learn more about the educational journey of their children so they can support them effectively. There are a variety of topics that families can learn more about in order to support their children. To do this, we do offer for Dual Language and ESL families workshops on similar topics, including but not limited to, the high school admission process (October), understanding Common Core Learning Standards (December), learning about the ELA exam (February), NYSESLAT and how to support students for success on these exams with or without a knowledge of English (March) and preparing to address summer learning loss (June). These workshops occur once every other month on Saturdays at 10:30 AM-11:30 AM from October through June and are provided by school personnel, including school leaders, counselors, teachers and the parent coordinator. The workshop's facilitator will depend on strengths in a specific topic, including certifications and professional experience. The providers will be an in house staff member team and be compensated at per session rate using Title III funds. (2 teachers X 6 sessions X 2 hours @ 60.65 = $1455.60) Written communication is always translated into Spanish and oral translation is available in English and in Spanish by school staff members to ensure the most impact of the resources. Families are invited through flyers, calendars backpacked home and followed up by phone master calls. Supplies cost 614.55 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Per session for staff in various components Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 9279.55 1236 curriculum for programming 1236 curriculum for programming  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) 614.45 Travel Other TOTAL 0 0 12366 Portion of funds will be used to pay for software for texting with students and parents None None total amount 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name The Laboratory School of Finance & Tech Borough Bronx School Number 223 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dr. Ramon Gonzalez Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Nicole Washington Teacher/Subject Area Ariadna Phillips-Santos Teacher/Subject Area David Ledesma Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Elisa Alvarez Assistant Principal Eric Lincoln Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent Violeta Guevara Parent Coordinator Wanda Hill Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) AP Ashley Downs C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 691 9 Total number of ELLs 62 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.97%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Spanish Spanish 2008-09 2013-14 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Tot # 0 0 0 3 4 0 7 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The data that we have to measure ELL performance reveal some important trends in our school. One is about the subgroups of ELLs we work with, and another is about program models. The students in our school break almost evenly into students who are ELLs and also have IEPs and students who are ELLs without IEPs. Another finding is that the largest group of ELLs are Long Term, followed closely by Developing. Our instructional program then, is primarily focused on the needs of lEP students and those who are also ELLs with over 4 years of service. We use a variety of tools to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. With our newcomers, we use the Spanish DRA to assess their L1 abilities. Although we do a beginning of year, midyear, and end of year reading assessment for all students, our ELLs receive additional reading assessments using the Teachers College Reading and Writing Project model throughout the entire year. Many students are a year or more behind in their reading on Fountas and Pinnell levels when they start school in September. In order to see growth in reading, students who have deficiencies in reading need to be assessed more frequently. The ESL teacher (in collaboration with ELA teachers) assesses each individual student according to their level and reading 0  calendars that students fill out in order to know when they need to be tested by a teacher. Once we know each student's reading level, TCRWP also provides targeted instruction at each "band" of levels. Reading levels are grouped according to what the students will encounter at each level. These can range from basic information a reader should understand from the book (setting, characters, mood,) to higher level thinking which leads students to develop questions about the characters and themes independently by tracking clues and metaphors the author is alluding to in their respective stories. Because of the reading data we have collected at the beginning of this school year, ESL, Dual Language, and Monolingual teachers have set up small groups in their classrooms based on the reading levels of their students. This has allowed for teachers to target instruction and design materials that are differentiated and appropriate to each student’s needs and abilities. Our high school ELLs are almost all long term ELLs with IEPs. Our challenge for this group is how to support their growth as readers and writers in English while providing grade level content that will prepare them for higher education options. We do this by tracking student performance via the subject specific PBAT riubrics in developmental performance assessments across content areas that prepare students for the rigor of commencement level PBATs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? For all students we have 5 interim assessment windows to track progress in reading and writing throughout the year. For our ELLs, we engage in more frequent cycles of assessment to effectively identify the appropriate instructional levels for students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Programs for ELLs at our school are evaluated using multiple forms of measurable data. This is in the form of formal assessments such as the NYSESLAT, ELA, and other NYS and Citywide exams. Other ways we evaluate students is by the programs that they use, both during school and after school. We also pay attention to our performance through accountability tools such as the School Quality Guide and AYP for ELLs as a subgroup. We aim to outperform ELLs at similar schools in our peer group. Besides this, we also give students, parents, and teachers occasional surveys that help us better understand how they learn, what they like/do not like, and most importantly, how to better improve the education of our students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? These assessments are used to plan for groupings and placements for students in appropriate interventions. ELL performance levels are also used in conjunction with the ENL Common Core Progressions to identify appropriate evidence of mastery and instructional levels for lesson and unit level tasks. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We provide tiered levels of intervention for our students based on their English proficiency level and the DRP assessment. Students are identified for specific interventions for reading based on their DRP score and a secondary screener if necessary. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The great majority of students based on the NYSESLAT are Expanding. These 43 out of 62 students are across grade levels and have different strengths. The historical strength of these students have been in listening and speaking with the bigger challenges in reading and writing. We find that students in Dual Language tend to test proficient more successfully than students in ENL. ELLs in Dual Language have reached proficiency at much higher rates than students in ESL and general education students much more than ELL students with disabilities. This year we see that the scores for reading and writing are closer to the scores for listening and speaking. Students at the high school level see a significant overlap between students who are ELLs and students who have not yet passed the ELA Regents in grades 11 and 12. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? At the beginning of the year, we use Regents and NYSESLAT data to build an appropriate level of services for students. Additional supports at the beginning of each term are identified to support subgroups of students based on 1  need. We also use student performance in courses and on interim assessments to make determinations as to the specific strengths and needs for each student. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ENL is provided to students as per their proficiency level. Most ENL based on our need is provided on an integrated basis for students during their content area classes. In the middle school the ENL supports take place during English language arts generally. The ENL teacher is separate from the content area teacher and supports specific students to meet rigorous goals with appropriate scaffolds. In the high school, the integration is occurring in the social studies classroom. The integrated support is heterogeneous and students are primarily grouped by proficiency level in their grade. The ENL teacher uses the social studies content to push students to meet challenging ENL outcomes. We also have standalone support that is targeted toward students with lower proficiency levels in a homogeneous setting. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not Applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Students in dual language receive instruction with support for their English development during their ELA courses which are taught in an integrated format with the ENL co teacher. For students that require more support it is provided in a standalone format. Inside the class students are grouped by proficiency levels. We have a 50/50 model where Spanish is the primary language of instruction in science, social studies and computer science for the students. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teachers collaborate with all ELA teachers of ELLs in grades 6-8 and conducts push-in services in their classrooms. These classes have both a separate reading and writing time four days a week, each with a span of at least 45 minutes. Standalone classes are organized by the same ENL teacher for low proficiency and beginning students. Each beginner student receives additional support to meet their mandate. These classes are 45 minutes long and meet at least four times a week. Students in Dual Language are part of a 50/50 model where the language of instruction is determined by the content area. Service time is aligned with CR Part 154 requirements. Entering and emerging students in middle school receive 360 minutes of ENL while other levels students receive 180 minutes of ENL and 180 minutes of ELA instruction. At the high school level, students receive appropriate ENL service (540/360/180 based on proficiency level) inclusive of standalone, integrated and home language support. Dual Language students have access to 180 minutes of HLA instruction each week and ENL students have access to HNL supports as needed based on proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All Dual Language program teachers are fluent Spanish speakers. The Dual Language program uses the last period of each day to focus on Home Language Arts. Science, technology, and social studies are taught in Spanish. The ENL instructor uses the students’ native languages as a means to build schema and help promote the L1 to make the L2 development stronger. All 2  students, ELLs and non-ELLs, receive 8-10 periods of ELA and math instruction every week. Instruction is grade and content appropriate and instructional strategies are centered around language instruction to support the vocabulary, language features and visuals that appear in classwork. Courses in Spanish are beginning to incorporate Home Language progressions and ENL settings are beginning to implement ENL standards and progressions to scaffold students learning of grade level standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We will ensure ELLs are assessed appropriately in their home language in a few ways. We solicit information from students and families in the spring to determine the best language for assessments. Our testing coordinator collaborates with classroom teachers to ensure that students are provided with the assessments that best meet the students' needs. We work with our bilingual certified staff to ensure that summative class assessments are able to assess student content knowledge regardless of language proficiency. In class assessments are designed to be implemented in the language of instruction. Home language formative and performance asks are designed to assess student understanding of content and skills in the language of instruction at the appropriate grade level considering the proficiency level of the student. Assessments to measure Spanish language proficiency include the DRA, DELE and SLP assessments. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. In the past our school has used the Academic Language and Literacy Diagnostic (ALLD) to better screen and service our SIFE (students with interrupted formal education.) These students are then placed in a program that meets at least three times a week, through which students acquire the foundations of English through the Wilson Reading Program. This program is designed to help lower level and SIFE students, using a multisensory approach for increasing reading, decoding, encoding, and vocabulary skills. They also receive L1 support through a Scholastic Spanish Guided Reading Program. b. Newcomer ELLs are a priority at MS 223. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the teachers who have ELLs in the classroom to ensure content is accessible and fair to the student’s abilities. Newcomers are administered the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB to see what their abilities are in their native language, as well as in English. This allows teachers to see what the student brings to the table. The ENL teacher conducts a pull-out class for beginner level newcomers that meets at least four times a week. c. ELLs that have been receiving services for 4 to 6 years are a growing concern at MS 223 because if their needs are not met, will turn into Long-Term ELLs. These are critical years for our students in which they can make tremendous growth or become stagnant ELLs that stay at the same proficiency level. Along with Long-Term ELLs, these students receive an array of interventions ranging from AIS, expanded day services in ELA, additional support from the ENL teacher, and participation in our ELL Success Academy that uses Achieve3000, English 3D and small-group instruction that not only builds skills for taking the NYSESLAT, but uses targeted instruction and differentiated strategies. d. Long-Term ELLs receive additional support, as they are the most diverse of our learners and are the bulk of our ELL population. This population includes our Special Education students. Along with the additional support that 4-6 year ELLs receive, Long-Term ELLs also get native language and ELA instruction in extended day and after-school math/ELA tutoring. e. ELLs that have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT receive additional support in ELA, monitoring and conferencing with their English language arts teacher, as well as testing accommodations for exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? 3  ELLs identified as having special needs are instructed in small standalone classes administered by the ENL teacher or integrated services. Based on student need, Wilson Reading System instruction is also provided. These courses target language acquisition while covering grade-appropriate content standards. Student programs are designed to make sure that students receive all mandated services as indicated on their IEPs. Student proress is monitored to identify growth and/or areas for additional support from special education staff as well as ENL staff. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We have two major initiatives to ensure ELLs with disabilities are serviced in the least restrictive environment. All of our self contained classes are parallel programmed to general education sections for ELA to support students who are ready for a mainstreaming opportunity. Also, pull out sections are designed by reading level and NYSESLAT level, regardless of IEP status. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. As noted before, our targeted intervention programs include extended day classes centered around ELA or math instruction, as well as an after-school group that focuses also on ELA and math tutoring. Expanded day support in ELA focuses on strengthening each student's reading level through small group work and writing on reading. Teachers conference with each individual student to assess progress in fluency, word chunking, and the formation of major themes in the story. In science and social studies, teachers collaborate with ENL staff when possible to identify and implement scaffolds appropriate to CCLS and ENL progressions for proficiency levels. For Dual Language students, supports and scaffolds for science and social studies are increasingly aligned to the HNL progressions. Expanded day support in math focuses on academic language and the breaking down of word problems into simpler, more accessible language for students. This instruction targets both dual language and ENL students. SIFE students are placed in home language classes to strengthen their L1 where appropriate so they can transfer the skills they learn into their L2. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? MS 223 will continue to leverage summer, after school and Saturday opportunities. Through our partnership with the Education Office of Spain as an International Spanish Academy, we are building programming for students in Spanish, including a Spanish Moth storytelling residency and a virtual collaboration with the Thuyssen Museum in Madrid. Both of these opportunities will give students an authentic opportunity to practice and improve Spanish language skills. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs or services that will be discontinued this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs and their parents are fully aware of all the programs available at MS 223. Besides parent newsletters, communication from the school, and letters sent home about program placement and additional support provided during and after school hours, ELLs partake in Academic Intervention Services where different content area teachers tutor students that are falling behind in various subject areas. Extended day service includes Native Language and ENL support, and are provided three days a week. These classes focus on language acquisition through the uses of QTEL strategies, measured through the SLP and DELE, and the use of Teachers College reading assessments. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials are an important part of language acquisition at MS 223. Native Language and L2 skills are developed through the use of texts from Achieve3000, a nonfiction website with daily relevant news articles. The articles, while covering the same story, vary in difficulty and we are able to differentiate instruction because of this. After reading the articles, students answers multiple choice questions, take part in a survey, and ultimately develop their ideas from the article into a fully developed essay. Content area materials, are used within the science classrooms in order to target learners at varying levels. Newcomers and low-proficiency students are placed in a class in which the Wilson Reading Program is used if 4  appropriate. Students start their classes with word-sound charts and sight words, gradually moving towards multi-syllable words and full sentences. After students have mastered these, they go on to reading short stories in their Wilson Student Workbooks, and share out main ideas though small group conversations and writing prompts. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is an integral part of our language development for ELLs. All Dual Language classes take Home Language Arts for grammar-instruction and building reading and writing skills with a timeframe of 180 minutes per week. During the rest of the school day, half of their classes are taken in Spanish, the other half in English. The ENL program focuses on home language support through cultural awareness through a bilingual library that is leveled according to the Teacher College assessment model. Students are tracked through the year through this assessment and also a preliminary, mid-year, and end of year assessment of reading levels in both English and Spanish. In ENL settings, home language support is provided as needed to students primarily in the entering and emergent levels. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All our materials are age and level appropriate. MS 223 has a committee of teachers that go through our libraries for not only level accuracy, but also if the content is appropriate for the age of our students. These modifications affect both the English and Spanish libraries throughout the school. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We are a colocated building with another 6-12 school,. We collaborate most closely in post secondary opportunities and campus athletic teams. Current and former ELLs are part of these opportunities with academic, linguistic and socioemotional benefits. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled students are invited into Summer Bridge Arts Institute where they get an opportunity to meet other students while at the same time receiving instructional support that will guide them through their first year at M.S. 223. This program is run by content area monolingual teachers as well as Dual Language instructors in order to guide our ELLs through their transition into our school. All incoming students to MS 223 are invited to a summer orientation program for four weeks in July and August. Teachers are provided with the names of ELL students by the AP to identify them early and work to support them effectively as they transition to middle school. Groupings of classes to effectively service all students are also determined at this time. Staff members are reminded of the procedures for new ELLs to New York City schools to ensure that all students are accurately identified and placed. In the fall, the ENL teacher provides teachers of ELLs with NYSESLAT scores and conducts reading assessments with the students to help their teachers understand where they are in their acquisition of language. At the end of 8th grade, the ENL teacher works with the school guidance counselor to make sure the ELLs are choosing the appropriate high school that will offer them the support that they need based on their proficiency level and available programs for students. Students that continue with us for high school as well as incoming students have the opportunity to attend College Bridge, a summer program for all incoming 9 th grade students with a focus on preparing for high school and earning high school credit in Health and another field. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Students in Dual Language are offered the opportunity to take accelerated Spanish in 9th grade around a thematic topic to further their Spanish language development. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 5  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. EPs and ELLs are integrated for nearly all of the instructional day. Science (5 periods), computer science, (5 periods), social studies (5 periods), and Spanish Language Arts (3 periods) are conducted in Spanish, while math (8 periods), English Language Arts (8 periods), art (2 periods ) and physical education (2 periods) are taught in English. The ENL teacher will work with specific groups of ELLs during English language arts class based on the content and the pacing for the class. b. Language use is separated by subject for our students in all grade levels through the program. All grades receive science, computer science and social studies instruction in Spanish. c. The Dual Language model used at M.S. 223 is self-contained for the exception of gym, where students are integrated with non Dual Language classes. Students are also taught in grade specific classes with the exception of Spanish Language Arts, where students are grouped by level of Spanish language proficiency (beginner, intermediate, advanced). d. While both Spanish and English are taught at the same time, Spanish Language Arts is taught to strengthen the L1 for native speakers and L2 development for English Proficient students. Where absolutely necessary in conten area classes, some sequential scaffolding will be provided but that is the rare exception. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development is a priority at MS 223. All ELL personnel at the school are involved in PD, whether it is attending or leading. The products of our professional development group ion recent years has included intensive interdisciplinary planning, which has had an impact on ELLs and EP students by creating a common vocabulary to be used across the school day. Study groups are led by faculty members that meet after school to plan and discuss what the needs of our students and teachers are in order to best support them. All staff members including administrators, bilingual and ESL teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, counselors and speech teachers participate in collaborative learning around the elements of the Danielson Framework, with opportunities for focus on the specific needs of ELLs. The major focus of our PD efforts is around desigining PreBATS that support students to create analytical essays, lierary essays, lab reports with background research and analysis of math problems that require modeling. These type of tasks require significant scaffolds that are considered by all instructiors once a month for all teaching staff. All content areas design these significant performance tasks for students to engage in and prepare them for graduation level tasks. These workshops take place on the second or third Monday of the month over the course of the year. Our school secretary and our parent coordinator participate in annual trainings from OELL to support and provide accurate information to families of ELLs regarding placement and program choice, services provided to ELLs and Title III and other enrichment opportunities as well during the school year and the summer. Suport for teachers to help all learners reach the goals of the CCLS is a priority at our school. Coaches, teachers and school leaders meet weekly to discuss instruction, design curriculum aligned to CCLS and make plans for groupings to cinclude all learners and differentiated approaches to help students access the standards and challenging content. teachers participate in inquiry around student assignments to develop ideas about how to support ELLs in their classes. Inquiry is also focused on teaceher work, specifically, unit plans, lesson plans and assessment to ensure alignment with CCLS and incorporation of the major instructional shifts for nonfiction, citing evidence and complex texts with rich vocabulary. These inquiry protocols make teacher work products stronger and allow class time to be more efficiently used. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 6  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All incoming students to MS 223 are invited to a summer orientation program for four weeks in July and August. Teachers are provided with the names of ELL students by the AP to identify them early and work to support them effectively as they transition to middle school. Groupings of classes to effectively service all students are also determined at this time. Staff members are reminded of the procedures for new ELLs to New York City schools to ensure that all students are accurately identified and placed. In the fall, the ENL teacher provides teachers of ELLs with NYSESLAT scores and conducts reading assessments with the students to help their teachers understand where they are in their acquisition of language. At the end of 8th grade, the ENL teacher works with the school guidance counselor to make sure the ELLs are choosing the appropriate high school that will offer them the support that they need based on their proficiency level and available programs for students. Students that continue with us for high school as well as incoming students have the opportunity to attend College Bridge, a summer program for all incoming 9 th grade students with a focus on preparing for high school and earning high school credit in Health and another field. Professional learning is an important facet of our school community's growth and development. Since current and former ELLs make up a sizeable chunk of our student body, our time is well spent learning about ways to support our various ELLs in their subgroups. Records are kept through agendas and sign in sheets for participants of weekly PD Mondays. Teachers of ELLs and specifically in Dual language are slated to meet as a team as early as possible to norm on instructional expectations in both Spanish and English taught classes. Professional learning activities also include retreats specifically around Dual Language instruction and all staff retreats held annually. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The fall onSeptember 28 and right around winter conferences in March will afford additional opportunities for connecting with families of our ELLs. The teachers in the Dual Language classes hold academic and cultural events for families 3-4 times a year. These annual meetings are a natural offshoot of the current conference process and can be done as families discuss academic performance with individual teachers. This has grown in popularity and is an opportunity that we can expand to include ENL families to participate. All school based functions have translation services available to families. We will make ourselves available on Tuesday afternoons for teams of teachers to meet with families who could not arrange for a meeting during Parent Conferences. Translation support is available to make sure there is clear communication between families and school staff. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. There are a number of structures in place that help to ensure that parents are aware of the program choices available for their child. The Home Language Identification Survey is given to new student admits and their guardians, to be completed upon enrollment in the school system. According to HLIS the Assistant Principal verifies whether or not the student should take the NYSITELL. If the NYSITELL is taken, the guardian is notified of their score and whether or not they require ELL services. There is a fall open house for all parents, where they receive information about the different programs offered and where Program Selection Forms are distributed. Other events besides enrollment and Open Housefor families of ELLs include: pousadas held each semester for families in dual language classes, parent teacher conferences held in November and February, and monthly Parent Association meetings. As a practice, translated resources including phone master calls and print flyers backpacked home are used to promote events, and translation services are available from Spanish speaking staff members and parent volunteers. The Parent Coordinator is an asset in spreading the word about events and activities and prividng translation support for families if necessary. 7  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ramon Gonzalez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Lab School of Finance & T School DBN: 07X223 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ramon Gonzalez Eric Lincoln Wanda Hill Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Nicole Washington ENL/Bilingual Teacher Violeta Guevara Parent David Ledesma Teacher/Subject Area Ismael Valentin Teacher/Subject Area Elisa Alvarez Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Ashley Downs Other AP Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X223 School Name: The Lab School of Finance & Tech (X Superintendent: Elisa Alvarez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Wanda Hill Parent Coordinator N Y * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess the needs of our school, we utilized the home language survey completed by the parents of our English language learners, used the ATS RCPL report, reviewed the school LAP and consulted with the Parent Association and the School Leadership Team to ensure that the needs of our community were being met in terms of translation and oral interpretation. We also utilized responses from the annual NYC School Survey. We also utilized student blue cards. Our school has 710 students who speak a handful of languages in addition to English. The majority of families that speak other languages at home speak Spanish, followed by a handful speaking French or Arabic. We have some families who speak Mixteco as well. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English French Soninke Mandinka Arabic 482 436 11 5 3 2 50.95 46.09 1.16 .53 .32 .21 490 426 11 5 3 2 51.85 45.08 1.16 .53 .32 .21 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish and English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? PA Notifications Monthly School Closures and Events Notifications School Newsletter School Calendar As Needed Monthly Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School Secretary one week prior to event School Secretary one week prior to event FL Teacher one week prior to first of the month Parent Coordinator one week prior to first of the month 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night September 11 interpretation service(s)? Call in numbers provided, translated documents and support staff interpreters 2  November Conferences November 1 March Conferences March 1 Call in numbers provided, translated documents and support staff interpreters Call in numbers provided, translated documents and support staff interpreters 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We utilize a school messaging system that is available to communicate with families in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. To ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663, we will dedicate time to share with staff during professional development time, the DOE’s goal to establish procedures for ensuring Limited English Proficient (LEP) parents are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate and have access to to programs and services in their preferred language. We will share resources they can use to translate, such as Google Translator. However, for more important translation we will share resources that the DOE provides for assistance for translation. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will update the home language information available on ATS as well as post information to parents and families on how to obtain translation or interpretation services. At the beginning of the school year, we will send a letter home in English and Spanish to families detailing the rights of families to information released by the school. For additional outreach, parents of newly arrived students will be invited to events in the fall that will outline their rights for translation and interpretation services and the relevant contact information for the school, regional and city contacts for such services. The school will distribute the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in the covered languages for families to receive. The school also conspicuously posts signage regarding access to the covered languages and the availability of interpretation for families. We will also obtain in Spanish and other languages as needed the appropriate forms for families to comply with CR A-663 in the areas of centrally produced documents or student specific documents. 3  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will poll parents and caregivers at both SLT meetings and Parent Association meetings to gauge the effectiveness and availability of translation services and resources. We will use this feedback coupled with the NYC School Survey to make adjustments and changes to our work for the benefit and inclusion of all of our families. 4 
