 09X231 School Name: EAGLE ACADEMY FOR YOUNG MEN Principal: HECTOR VELAZQUEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): X231 The Eagle Academy for Young Men 32090011231 6 – 12 4143 Third Ave. Bronx, NY 10457 718-466-8000 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: 718-466-8090 Fax: Phone Number: Hector Velazquez hvelazquez@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Hector Velazquez Jerald Tskeas Lester Grant Nicole Freeman Jennifer Jones Eagle Academy Foundation/Bell CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 9 Michael Alcoff Superintendent: Superintendent’s Office Address: 2 Metro Tech Center, Brooklyn, NY 11201, Room 3900 Superintendent’s Email Address: MAlcoff@schools.nyc.gov 718-935-3074 718-935-5780 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: Fordham Plaza, Bronx, 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Hector Velazquez Jerald Tsekas Lester grant Jennifer Jones Isaiah DeSimone Sherrae Rembert Melissa Johnson Nicole Freeman *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Tomas Hernandez Robert D'Amico Jennifer Boone UFT/Teacher UFT/Teacher UFT?Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The Eagle mission, to develop young men committed to the pursuit of academic excellence, strong character, and responsible leadership.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Eagle Academy for Young Men is located in the South Bronx and has a total population of 513 students grades 6-12 where 58% are Black, 40% are Latino, and 2% other. Of the 526 students, 28% are special needs students and 4% are English Language Learners. In addition 70% of our students are from low-income families. In its 15th year, The Eagle Academy For Young Men continues to make strides in improving the educational outcomes for our young men. Eagle Bronx works to provide our boys with the academic opportunities, social-emotional supports and character building experiences that they may not have gotten entering a more traditional NYCDOE public school. With 100% of our resources allocated and invested in young men, Eagle has been at the forefront of the conversation regarding the plight of males of color, who have historically struggled to graduate from high school. In 2012, when former Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced the Expanded Success Initiative to address this target population, Eagle had already been addressing these students’ needs, both inside and outside of the classroom, for almost ten years. In our fourth year as a full 6 th -12 th grade school, we are further strengthening our ability to address our scholars' academic, social-emotional needs at an earlier age. For example, this year we are proud to say that all of our 8th graders took the high school Common Core Algebra I Regents. As a result 65 % of our 8th graders that sat passed the exam and earned a high school math credit. Eagle’s mission is carried out not just by a dedicated faculty and staff, but is also enhanced by support from The Eagle Academy Foundation, 100 Black Men, the College-Bound Initiative program, and BELL Learners. With such support we are able to provide our young men with additional programs and opportunities that serve our students and families and also provide unique learning experiences for them. Our Mentoring program, advisory programs, along with a robust offering of MSQI enrichment and academic programs, enable our students to complement their academic demands with much-needed support and guidance. We are proud of how many families come to us looking for answers to help support them in their efforts to raise and guide strong-minded and capable young men. Aside from these programs, we further engage our students in the “Eagle experience” by dividing the student body into four distinct houses. We ramped up our student accountability by having each student earn merits (or demerits) to hold them more accountable for their academic performance, learning outcomes and their conduct. At Eagle, we want our scholars to demonstrate “C.L.E.A.R” :(Confidence, Leadership, Effort, Academic Excellence and Resilience). “Be CLEAR” is our motto. In addition, our daily morning town hall meetings with our scholars provide them with opportunities to share and celebrate achievements, discuss community issues, and charge them with positive daily messages to promote and build character. Our rites of passage and rituals (Daily Libation and recitation of Invictus in Town Hall, Senior Blazer Convocation Ceremony, Grade-Level Retreats, House competitions, grade-specific ties that students wear as part of their uniforms) are pillars of the Eagle culture. We like to say that our school culture is reinforced by our academic program, and our students’ learning outcomes are bolstered by the strength of our school culture. Our high expectations permeate the entire school and Eagle community, as we constantly develop new ways and strategies to improve our students’ academic performance, all the while making sure that our boys do not simply “go to Eagle,” but that they are true “EAGLES!” 0  3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. - 30 percent of our students are Students With Disabilities and 5 percent are ELLs (Self-Contained, ICT, SETTS, and Related Services). Students need guidance transitioning from middle school settings to high school settings in both academic, social and emotional well being. Our scholars require various accommodations, modifications, scaffolds and supports in order to successfully achieve in the classroom. In addition, they need counseling and individual interventions to provide access to the general curriculum in the least restrictive environment. Individual plans need to be carefully written, reviewed and supported to ensure that every support needed for success is met. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which our school made the most progress over the past year, were Rigorous Instruction, Effective School Leadership and Trust. As for this year our key areas of focus are Rigorous differentiated instruction and assessment. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X231 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 511 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 34 35 7 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 23 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 78.0% % Attendance Rate 72.0% % Reduced Lunch 5.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 42.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3 2% 10% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 69% 64% 63.0% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 120 117 1 3 89.6% 6.1% 27.0% 55.0% 0.6% 1.4% 4 27% 8.9 13.4% 9% 68% 72% 81.6% 11% N/A No No YSH N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths relative to the Framework are:  Rigorous Instruction - On both QRs in 2014-15 and 2016-17 we received a proficient in 1.1, additionally our scores increased on the School Quality Snapshot from 2.45 to 2.95.  Effective School leadership - The school received ratings of proficient on the 2016-2017 QR in indicators 1.3, 3.1, 4.1, and 4.2. There was an increase in the School Quality Snapshot score from 2015-16 (2.41) to 2016-17 to (3.17). Needs based on the 2016-17 QR:  Professional development that is inquiry based .   Professional development opportunities for teachers to use data which revises curriculum and units to Increase the levels of student engagement through rigorous tasks support multiple entry points for all students  Practices that provide actionable feedback to students  Implementation of on-the-spot checks for understanding Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of inquiry focused on various assessment data to revise curricula for scholars, there will be an increase of 5% in achievement as evidenced by Cohort V’s lowest-third students achieving at least ten credits and passing 1 Regents exam. 3  By June 2019 in grades 6-8, as a result of collaborative inquiry focused on various assessment data, Level 1` students will decrease by 10% and proficiency will increase by 5% as evidenced by NYS ELA and Math Assessments. Rich Text Editor, 4333 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Alignment of grading policies across departments, Teacher Leadership Program creating teacher leaders that align strategic planning practices and set SMART goals across content and department teams. Cohort meetings that track student progress and provide data to the staff. Professional Learning workshops, which support teachers through inquiry cycles based on identified pedagogue needs in Danielson's 2013 Rubric 1a, 1e, 3c and 3d component's. 2. Provide caseload management of students with disabilities and lowest third Cohort U students. Parental outreach on Tuesday Professional Work days. SIT meetings to ensure quality written IEPs that meet the needs of the students. Create an AP of special education to support the initiatives and improvement of their acheivement. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Cohorts U and V 9/2018- 6/2019 Teachers, guidance counselors, administrators Lowest Third, cohorts T, U and V 9/2018- 6/2019 Special education teachers, IEP Coordinator, administrators, guidance counselors 3. Conduct weekly attendance meetings that strategically target LTAs and students with declining attendance rates. Cohorts U and V 9/2018- 6/2019 Administrator, attendance teacher, guidance counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will utilize the Parent Coordinator and teacher leaders to provide families with information during family curriculum night in September of 2018. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Hiring of consultants and mentor, creation of special education supervisor position, provide per session hours for teachers to work on IEPs, professional period assignment of IEP work for special education teachers, tutoring sessions for students, review books for Regents exams, professional development for teachers and administration. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 5  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 70% of the students in Cohort V will have earned five credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Stars, Regents, Mock exams, scholarship reports, transcript audits Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths relative to this Framework:  The Eagle House Model groups students into four houses to promote healthy competition and peer accountability.  Daily Town Hall gives students a voice and adults an opportunity to address issues within the community  An engaged parent body that regularly attends parent association meetings.  The Scholar Life Department supports the tone and culture of the school Needs: Increase the teacher participation with tone and culture in the school   Engage all stakeholder in Transformation Room data dives.   Increase adult presence around the perimeter and (safe corridor) before and after school. (priority need) Increase engagement of the students during classroom instruction which decreases classroom removals Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through mentoring, merit and demerit systems, and restorative practices, there will be a 10% decrease in the level 4 incidents as compared with the 2017-2018 school year. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students, all teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Administration, Director of Scholar Life, guidance counselors, teachers, Astor service Administration, guidance counselors, school social worker Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Students will receive support in the transformation room on infractions and disciplinary issues. When students are referred, they begin the intake process by writing a reflection. In addition, they discuss the choices and decisions leading to an acceptance of appropriate consequences and next steps. Data will be collected and used to help support best practices in the classroom when identifying trends in student behavior. Teachers will receive reports on their own referrals to the transformation room. In addition, we will have a mental and health services clinic. Teachers will receive de-escalation training to help minimize the number of student classroom removals resulting in safe and structured learning environments. Parent Association meetings where parents assemble and are informed about information concerning the neighborhood and school community. All teachers Fall 2018 Parents 9/2018-6/2019 Director of Scholar Life, administration Students will participate in a merit system that rewards positive behaviors based on a creation of students in houses. All students 9/2018-6/2019 Director of Scholar Life, teachers, administration Teachers meet in teams to discuss and analyze school environment data to use classroom strategies that decrease infractions. All teachers 9/2018-6/2019 Teachers, administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will provide workshops for parents that involve social and emotional support for our scholars. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  All Eagle Staff, students and parents will participate in order to achieve this goal. Hiring of more support staff. Staff professional development around the citywide behavioral expectations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2019, there will be a 10% decrease in the number of level 4 incidents compared to prior school year's incidents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORS and Transformation Room data will be used to assess the impact of this plan. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In the 2017-18 school year, teachers met in departments weekly during professional development time. Department Chairs provided Professional learning for departments based on the school's instructional focus. Primarily, the main focus was on higher student engagement through discussions and writing. Although our Quality Review rating was proficient for 4.2 in 2014-15 (Teacher Teams and Leadership Development) our rating was based more on grade teams than on department teams. Strengths ● Established protocols for team meetings ● Department Chairs lead and facilitate departmental professional learning. Needs ● Strengthen protocols used to measure the effectiveness of formative assessment data and curriculum development used to drive instruction ● Use student work protocols to revise curricula and inform instructional practice. ● Strengthen staff capacity regarding curriculum development (priority need) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By November 2018, departments will generate grade and subject specific aligned differentiated student work products that will result in a 10% increase on constructed response scores on Regents exams by June 2019. By June 2019, as a result of collaborative inquiry focused on improved teacher feedback and the use of formative assessment to inform planning, there will be a 10% increase in teachers rated effective in Danielson components 1A, 1E and 3D. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The administrative team and the department chairs will participate in the Teacher Leadership Program. In addition, department chairs will align and turnkey the best practices for engaging our young men. The BFSC will provide targeted PD that will help support teachers in their development of differentiation, scaffolds, ELL support, SWD supports, and assessment practices for lowest-third students. Department Chairs 9/2018– 6/2019 Department Chairs, departments, administration,TLP, facilitators Teachers 9/2018– 6/2019 Administration, Department Chairs Inquiry cycles of PD reflect an analysis of data that will help meet the needs of all student groups and sub-groups including quality development of IEPs. All students 9/2018-2019 Administration, Department Chairs and Teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school has parent engagement built into our program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. ● Per-session for department chairs, TLP program, BFSC PD Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  By February of 2018, there will be a 3% increase in the number of effective teachers in Domain 3 as evidenced by MOTP data when comparing cycle 1 ratings data to cycle 4 ratings data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Eagle has a collaborative and dedicated Administrative Team and cohort of teachers (who are in administrative/leadership programs) that can design more effective and relevant professional development opportunities for the staff, especially with the “built-in” PD time on Mondays and Professional Work time on Tuesdays. These actions should bolster the monthly Department Chair meetings and allow those teachers in administrative/leadership programs to look more globally at the school’s capacity building and our students’ and teachers’ needs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By October 2018, the mathematics department will deliver Common Core aligned baselines and use the assessment data to develop an inquiry plan to implement and assess the effectiveness of checks for understanding in the classroom, resulting in a 10% increase on Common Core aligned interim assessment performance by June 2019. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide Department Chairs with readings on topics covered in Professional Development sessions. (For example, Formative and Summative Assessments [Assessment for Learning by Stiggins and Formative Assessment: Examples of Practice by Wylie] that drive the discussions and Department meeting activities. The Special Education Department will meet each week to implement strategies presented during Professional Development sessions throughout the year. Charging Department Chairs and teachers in Administrative/Leadership programs to turnkey Professional Development resources and materials, as well as having them attend relevant PD workshops. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Department Chairs turnkey information and strategies to teachers in their departments Special Education Teachers; Admin Teams 9/2018– 6/2019 Admin Team; Department Chairs Department Chairs 9/2018– 6/2019 9/2018– 6/2019 Special Education teachers Department Chairs; Teachers in Leadership Programs How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will provide workshops supported by the administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators, Department Chairs, Teachers, Students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 4  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the the end of the first semester, departments will have utilized interim assessments to analyze data that increases overall unit exams by 5 percent. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. SchoolNet Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our most recent Learning Environment Survey results available indicate that over 98% of the parent respondents are satisfied with the education that their sons received, we aim to improve the type of engagement that our parents have with our teachers and with the school as a whole. Too often, the type of engagement that some parents have with Eagle hinges on their sons’ negative behaviors or focus on his misbehaviors. We want to make our Parent Engagement sessions more relevant and provide parents with greater insights regarding their sons learning, areas for growth and areas of need. While we hope to increase our outreach with our Eagle parents, we know that Eagle parents can also serve and volunteer within Eagle to help support our goals and mission. Parent Teacher conference time should not be the main times that we see parents enter our school to connect with our staff. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, as a result of targeted outreach focused on improved student outcomes, there will be a 25% increase in the number of family members that attend at least three family based events. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Parent Coordinator schedules Parent meetings every other month that incorporate grade-team “breakout rooms” for parents to discuss issues specific with teachers on their sons’ grade teams. In addition, the Parent Coordinator engages parents in Eagle events and campaigns, in conjunction with the Parent Association, which enable parents to become more invested in Eagle and the day-to-day operation of the school. The Parent Coordinator will create a volunteer tracking log to determine the type and amount of parental volunteering for this school year. This information will be publicized at PA meetings, in a showcase in the Main Lobby of the school and updated regularly to account for their volunteer service. The school data specialist will regularly update the parent coordinator with a list of parents who have not registered or logged in to PupilPath, and the parent coordinator will use that list to have login instructions available for said parents at every major school event. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent coordinator, administration Eagle Parents & teachers on Grade Teams Parent Association (PA) meetings every other month Parents 9/2018-6/2018 Parent coordinator Parents 9/2018-6/2018 Parent coordinator, data specialist If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Eagle Academy for Young Men Foundation Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Parent Association President, Parents, Administration Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February of 2018, 60% of parents will have attended at least one parent association meeting, attended a parent/teacher conference session, and/or logged in to PupilPath. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent coordinator parent volunteer tracker, sign-in sheets, PupilPath logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Scholars who demonstrate low mastery ability or are identified as “at risk” are enrolled to reduce to potential of failing. Scholars who demonstrate low mastery ability or are identified as “at risk” are enrolled to reduce to potential of failing. Scholars who demonstrate low mastery ability or are identified as “at risk” are enrolled to reduce to potential of failing. Scholars who demonstrate low mastery ability or are identified as “at risk” are enrolled to reduce to potential of failing. Students with Mandated Counseling; Students identified by Guidance Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Review concepts taught on ELA Regents Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before and after school as well as on select Saturdays Review concepts taught on Math Regents Tutoring Before and after school as well as on select Saturdays Review concepts taught on Living Environment or Earth Science Regents Tutoring Before and after school as well as on select Saturdays Review concepts taught on Global and U.S. Regents Tutoring Before and after school as well as on select Saturdays Small group and one-on-one counseling sessions Small group and one-on-one counseling sessions Before and after school as well as on select Saturdays 9  Counselors/Social Worker 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 39 students (7.01% of the student population) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Uniforms, school supplies, counseling services, merit system based on positive behavior and high character. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In an effort to ensure all teachers are highly qualified, teachers are recruited based on the needs of the school. Teachers are also provided professional development by trained consultants and administration at the school. Teachers are also encouraged to continuously improve their P. D and share knowledge with colleagues. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). We have a Professional Development plan that is designed to meet the needs of all teachers and students in developing lesson plans and unit plans designed with Common Core Standards from grades 6-12. Our math consultant meets with grades 6-12 math teachers to develop classroom practices that incorporate the strategies necessary for students to master the math thinking necessary to meet the Common Core expectations. High school vertical teams meet to plan and develop units of study that are Common Core aligned as high school students prepare to take their New York State exams in January 2017 if necessary and June 2017. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Grade team leaders and Department Chairs meet to discuss their needs with the Admin team. Grade teams meet weekly to discuss student needs, assessment cycles, and the progress observer through the review of student work. Professional development plans are generated by the feedback from the findings of the grade teams and through the MOTP results in Advance. The multiple assessment measures are at the root of the decision making process, supported by the Teacher Effectiveness Framework with particular attention to Domain 4, Professional Responsibilities. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 416,06 x 4  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 623,608 x 5A,5B,5C,5D,5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 5  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X231, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [School name] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 8  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X231, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 9  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 0  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 1  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name The Eagle Academy For Young Men Borough Bronx School Number 231 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Hector Velazquez Assistant Principal Stephen J. Mathur Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Diana Austin Teacher/Subject Area Diana Austin Coach School Counselor Beckner Joseph Parent Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Superintendent Michael Alcoff Parent Coordinator Denise Browne Field Support Center Staff Member Loveena Thomas Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 565 7 Total number of ELLs 26 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.60%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The NYSESLAT results, along with the specific modalities, serve as a foundation for assessing student skill level and areas for growth. The ENL teachers work in an integrated teaching model with other teachers, which allows for greater and deeper assessment of ENL skill level. Instructional activities and performance tasks are geared to address the four modalties of listening, speaking, reading and writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Middle school teachers meet in grade teams, which allows them to meet collectively to make instructional decisions. In addition, Monday PD sessions allow ENL teachers to work with other content area teachers to ensure that instructional decisions are made to address the ENL learners. 8  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Aside from looking for progress on the NYSESLAT, we evaluate student Regents scores and scores on Middle School exams. In addition, course pass rate is evaluated to determine how successful our ENLs and our ENL instruction is. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers use the data to plan strategies that support the general curricula. In addition, the ENL department meet to discuss the effectiveness of strategies and support for our scholars. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The low writing modality scores on the NYSESLAT indicate that this should be an area of focus for intensive instructional planning and performance for all ENL students: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? ENL teachers provide PD and collaborate with ICT teachers to support adjustments made. As a result we Infuse reading and writing performance tasks into lessons that address the specific areas of concern. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is provided in free-standing and integrated (push-in model) mainstreamed classes, with Middle School students placed in 6-8 multi-grade classes based on their proficiency results/levels. The same is offered for our High School students in grades 9-12. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A: c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Beginning (Entering) level students (in grades 6-12) meet with the certified ESL teacher in free-standing and mainstream classes (push in) for at least the required minimum number of minutes per week (540 minutes in total, with at least 180 minutes in standalone ENL classes). For our Emerging level students, they receive at least the 360 minutes per week, with at least 90 minutes of standalone ENL and at least 180 in integrated ENL/ELA. The Transitioning level students receive at least the 180 minutes per week of ENL in inegrated settings. Expanding level students receive at least 180 minutes of ENL per week and the Proficient/Commanding level students receive the 90-minute minimum per week. Because Eagle offers a Free-9  Standing/integrated/push in model ESL program, HLA instruction is not provided in conjunction with Dual Language or Transitional Bilingual programs. Eagle offers Foreign Language courses in Spanish and French. Guidance counselors review the RELC report in ATS to ensure that the students are scheduled in STARS correctly. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students in integrated/push in model classes receive the ELA content in mainstream classes along with the support of the ENL teachers, Mr. Rodriguez and Ms. Austin. Ms. Austin teaches students who require the standalone ENL minutes. She infuses her lessons with ENL and ELA curricula goals and assessments. We are using the Connections curriculum for our ELA classes, which aligns with the Common Core Learning Standards . Middle School students have more than 5 periods of ELA/Humanities instruction and more than 5 periods of math per week. The Common Core curriculum use is Expeditionary. In some cases, Middle School students have an additional reading period as part of their regular day schedule. High School students who are ENLs also are placed in integrated/push-in model classes in ELA. The ELA teachers work with the ENL teachers to scaffold and differentiate the texts and assignments to enhance the "point of entry" for ENL students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The parents/guardians of Over the Counter admits who are entering the NYCDOE schools for the first time from another country are given the HLIS surveys to determine if they should be tested via the NYSITELL. Our AP in charge Ms. Williams provides the survey to students with our ENL teachers. This process is ongoing throughout the school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. The two SIFE students are 6 th graders who receive more indvidualized instruction from the ENL teacher, ensuring that the students receive differentiated instruction and assignments that the students can comprehend and complete. Ms. JumppMorris, the Middle School guidance counselor, provides the students and their families with additional support and services. The 6 th graders participate in our afterschool program (Bell Learners). b. Since students who are classified as Newcomers may not be at the same proficiency levels and/or grade levels, it is difficult to group them for their classes. These students are monitored to ensure that they are progressing and making improvements in their performance, most notably in ELA. Students and parents receive progress reports in order to assess their progress. c. Developing students are monitored and supported by their ELA and ENL teachers to ensure that they are making improvements so that they can pass not only the NYSESLAT, but the New York State ELA exams and the ELA Regents. d. Long-term students are encouraged to participate in extra ELA/ENL tutoring to exit from the ENL program, particularly if the students are also preparing to take the ELA Regents. e. Former ELLs will continue to receive additional supports, including tutoring, as they transition out of the ENL program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The instructional strategies that teachers of ELL-SWDs use to provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development include extensive vocabulary building, use of sentence starters and word banks, and use of visuals and graphic organizers. The grade-level materials that teachers of ELL-SWDs use include books and readings that are at grade-level and scaffolded with guided read-alouds. Teachers of ELL-SWDs also have access to and discuss student IEPs as well as use IEPs to set goals for these students. 0  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs are programmed into mainstream classes for certain subject areas as well as Self-Contained environments for extra support in order to meet their diverse needs and provide them with the necessary support to enable them to function within the least restrictive environments. ELL-SWDs are also provided with after-school opportunities to work one-on-one with the certified ENL teacher, Orlando Rodriguez. : 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All students, no matter their proficiency levels, are supported through the day-to-day instruction in integrated and/or free-standing ENL classes. Middle School students have an afterschool program to assist them with their academic needs, as well as a targeted Reading program built into their schedules. All programs are provided in English.: 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We will provide a math program called Think Through Math which offers support in students' native language. We are also vetting computer programs to support reading and writing. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Historically, we haven't had a bilingual program. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are eligible for all school programs like any other student in the school. These may include our Extended Learning Opportunities and afterschool tutoring provided by teachers. Outreach is done through daily Town Hall announcements to all students, through mailings, emails to parents and by the ESL teacher reaching out to the ELL population specifically.The Eagle Foundation supplements Eagle's budget by providing funding for the ELO programs, which occur afterschool for five days a week. in addition, students can participate in our Mentoring Program on Saturdays, sponsored by the 100 Black Men in Law Enforcement Organization. These programs are offered to help address the educational crisis that affects "boys of color" in New York City. The main goal is to enrich each student's educational and social experience at Eagle, providing them with opportunities to participate in meaningful activities that increase their engagement in school, which should lead to improved student outcomes and higher levels of success during and after high school. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials that are used to support ELLs include English dictionaries, bilingual dictionaries, bilingual content area glossaries, visuals, manipulatives, computers, SMART Boards, and online resources. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? A translator is provided for parent meetings and to enhance communication among ENL parents, students and teachers. Letters sent home to parents are translated as well. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Continuous assessments drive multiple entry points for our ELLs. As a result, age- and grade-appropriate texts are used with both the Middle School and High School ELLs. Research based ENL strategies are used to enhance class instruction at all grade and proficiency levels. 1  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We do not share a space. We have our own building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All incoming students, who are mainly 6th and 9th Grade students, are acclimated to the school through the Summer Bridge program. All students meet their ENL teachers and are assessed. Information is communicate with parents in their native language about our services. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Eagle offers Spanish language courses. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development for our staff members include trainings provided by the BFSC. ENL teachers go to the PDs and turnkey the information during faculty PDs. In addition, the ENL teachers meet in content and grade level teams. At these meetings, strategies, data and progressed is shared. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The support provided to staff in assisting ELLs as they transition from middle to high school will include knowledge of students' strengths and weaknesses in both language, modalities, and content areas as well as their learning styles. In addition, the Advacne document, "Specific Considerations for Teacher of English Language Learners" will be distributed to all teachers and used in PDs and in feedback sessions with administrators. Staff will also be trained in ELL issues through the series of professional development workshops to be led by the ENL teachers. ELL training for all staff will be met through the series of professional development workshops to be implemented by the certified ESL teachers, Diana Austin and Orlando Rodriguez. 2  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent involvement is generally very strong at the school, with many active parents in the Parent Association turning out at school events. Extensive outreach has been done to parents of ELLs through telephone calls and mailings to disseminate information and encourage parent involvement in meetings and school events. Parent volunteers and translators hired are available to help provide translation services. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Aside from the regular Parent Association meetings that we hold, ENL parents will attend specific ENL meetings held by our ENL teachers. In addition, all parents are invited to many afterschool and weekend events designed for parents by our Parent Coordinator. These include "Chat & Chews," Women's and Men's Council Meetings, College Financial Aid evenings, and grade-specific events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our mission is to build young men with character. Therefore, we immerse our scholars into our school culture using our core values: C.L.E.A.R. (Confidence, Leadership, Effort, Academic Achievement and Resilience). 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Hector Velazquez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Eagle Academy For Young Men School DBN: 09x231 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Hector Velazquez Title Principal Stephen J. Mathur Assistant Principal Denise Browne Parent Coordinator Orlando Rodriguez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Diana Austin Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Joseph Beckner School Counselor Michael Alcoff Olga Mejia-Glenn Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 9/5/17 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 9x231 School Name: The Eagle Academy For Young Men Superintendent: Michael Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Browne Denise Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. 1. When a new student who may be an ELL enrolls in the school, the HLIS is administered by the certified ESL teacher, Jeremiah Wilson. The parent and student are interviewed in order to assess lanugage needs. The NYSITELL is then administered upon determination of language needs by the Certified ESL teacher in the appropriate language, if necessary, and the results determine whether or not the student is entitled to an ELL program. Every spring, the NYSESLAT is administered on the allotted test dates to all of the identified ELLs in the school. 2. Within the first weeks of school when the ELL student population has been determined. The certified ESL teacher, Jeremiah Wilson, conducts outreach via letters and telephone calls to ELL parents for a Parent Orientation. At the Parent Orientation, the three program choices are outlined and discussed by Jeremiah Wilson, the ESL teacher, in the Entitlement letters, the Parent Orientation video, and brochures that are available. The 6  Entitlement letters, Parent Orientation video, and brochures are all provided in both English and the parents' preferred language. An Eagle staff member is used to translate into English. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Fulani Afrikaans Chinese Any Dutch French Soninke TWI 637 93 4 1 2 1 1 2 2 85.73 85.73 .54 .13 .27 .13 .13 .27 .27 634 95 4 1 2 1 1 2 2 85.44 12.8 .54 .13 .27 .13 .13 .27 .27 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 7  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Principal's letters to parents that accompany the report cards each marking period. Students receive three report cards each term , for a total of six for the school year. in addition, flyers from the Parent Coordinator regarding Eagle events, such as after-school programs, testing dates, after school activities and parent-teacher conferences. Parents can click "En Espanol" on our Google Classroom/online grading system . Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Information sent in the summer through our Pupil Path portal translated in Spanish, text messaging service translated for parents July and August We utilize Google translation and have a staff member review translated document July 13th Parent Meeting & August 2nd Parent Summer Meeting September 7th, September 30th, and several times during each month. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Association Meetings: September 30, November 18, We will have dates soon for January, March, May and June Parent Meetings interpretation service(s)? We submit paperwork in advance to the interpretation unit 8  Anti-bullying Workshops October 24th & February 13th we will submit paperwork in advance to interpretation unit Parent Teacher Conferences November 9 & March 6th Workshops: Fire Safety, Financial, Health, and other upcoming workshops We are in the process of solidifying dates in October, November, December, January, February, March, April and May. We will submit paperwork in advance to the interpretation unit We will submit paperwork in advance to the interpretation unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Eagle Academy’s communication strategies to reach limited-English-proficient families in the event of a school emergency: School messenger, our text messaging service via Remind.com, Pupil Path, and utilizing staff members who speak the language to make direct phone calls. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will host a meeting with staff members to ensure they are aware of the goals of Chancellor’s Regulations. Resources offered are telephone translating services for staff members, scheduling a member from the interpretation unit for scheduled parent meetings. Providing staff members with documentation at the beginning of the year regarding interpretation resources to help them with parent/guardian communication. All staff members will have access to the Parent Coordinator, who is the point person, for all interpretation inquiries. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 9  The Parent Coordinator will post information about Translation services for parents upon their entrance into Eagle. In addition, information will be disseminated to parents and guardians at Parent Association meetings. The ENL teachers will provide their students and their families with the above mentioned /listed information for parents and students. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Coordinator and ENL teachers will create brief surveys regarding the quality of the translation services and its availability for parents. When possible, we would like to ensure that we have a translator with whom we have worked in order to provide consistency for our parents. 0 
