 10X243 School Name: WEST BRONX ACADEMY FOR THE FUTURE Principal: WILPER MORALES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Section 1: School Information Page School Information West Bronx Academy for the Future 10X243 School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: 321000011243 6 - 12 500 East Fordham Road (718) 563-7139 School Number (DBN): (718) 563- 7362 Fax: KishaAnthony kanthon@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Wilper Morales Lizandra Santiago Lisa Stewart JoshuaCasson Teresa Acosta SaadFaroque SandroVillalona NA District Information Geographical District: 10 Richard Cintron Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 Superintendent’s Office Address: rcintron@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5124 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity Support Center Alexandria Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: FAX: 718-326-8140 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Wilper Morales Lizandra Santiago Lisa Stewart n/a Teresa Acosta SaadFaroque SandroVillalona n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ CSA Representative   Name Yarissa Avila Joshua Casson Tanya English - Rogers Elba Tavarez Dina Munoz Edwin Vega Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ UFT Representative Member/ UFT Representative Member/ UFT Representative Member/ Parent Representative Member/ Parent Representative Member/ Parent Representative Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? West Bronx Academy for the Future is an urban community committed to accelerating student learning in a structured environment with a focus on technology. Our teachers at West Bronx Academy deliver rigorous instruction, collaborate with one another and aim to build trust and build strong community ties as outlined in the framework for great schools. The administration works diligently to provide a supportive, collaborative environment with all stakeholders.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. West Bronx Academy currently has a total population of 567 students of which 23% are students with I.E.P.s and 12% are English Language Learners. Last year, we created a supportive environment by implementing specific supports for our students that we have expanded this year. For example, we have continued our advisory program for students in grades 9 - 12. In advisory, our teachers address our students academics needs in addition to career readiness. We have targeted academic support for our students who need academic tutoring for Middle School Ela and Math, as well as HS Regents based courses. Our Strive for College program that was initially for seniors last year has been made available to our 11th graders this school year. To continue providing a supportive environment for our school community we provide all of our teaches with a laptop so there is ease when implementing lessons with technology. All of our classrooms at West Bronx are equipped with projectors and Promethean boards so that technology can be incorporated into daily lessons. Laptop carts are available for student use across grade levels and subject areas. West Bronx has wireless Internet service. This year is the 2nd year we are partnered with the Community Association of Progressive Dominicans (ACDP). ACDP provides (OST) outside of the school classroom after school, on weekends and during school vacations. In an effort to support students’ social, emotional, and academic capabilities. This year, ACDP will help us implement parent workshops to build a strong home school relationship. Our goal is to provide parent workshops during the day and evening to maximize parent participation. Skedula, an online grading system, is available at West Bronx Academy so that teachers may record attendance, assignments and grades that can be checked at any time by both students and parents. Guidance counselors and advisors at West Bronx Academy guide 9th - 12th graders through the college and/or career process, working on such things as scholarships, applications and resumes. West Bronx Academy offers after-school tutoring across grade levels as well as credit recovery in the upper grades. All students perform work on laptops, use Promethean boards and interactive technology in their classrooms. West Bronx Academy for the Future has a range of extra-curricular activities, including student government, basketball, soccer, yearbook club, seasonal spirit activities, as well as incentive and educational trips. Our students have access to an Arts program after school as well. West Bronx is a campus school, located within the Theodore Roosevelt Educational Campus. As part of the campus we have access to four full-size gyms and two swimming pools. We are also able to take advantage of various resources, and in the future will be offering building-wide advanced placement and other specialty courses. All schools within the campus are scanning schools. At West Bronx Academy we envision our school as a part of the larger Bronx community. In an effort to support students in their development West Bronx partners with local colleges and universities providing programs during the day and after school. At West Bronx Academy all school stakeholders articulate the school’s vision and the school-wide goals. In addition, all efforts are employed to consistently promote school improvement in both academic achievement and cohort progress. The principal makes strategic decisions to build staff capacity, to re-structure the school into academies, and to allocate fiscal resources for programs, technology, and data supports to address the immediate needs of the school community. The school leader uses and encourages the staff to use evidence-based systems to improve critical individual and school-wide practices. West Bronx Academy has overarching systems and understandings to support student social, emotional and developmental health. The school promotes a vision aligned to programs that promote best practices. All 0  stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of their roles in supporting the body in these areas and the staff uses data to determine areas of need. The school uses data to support student social and emotional developmental health. At West Bronx Academy there is regular communication with students and their families to foster high expectations for student academic achievement. The school creates a culture of open and frequent communication among staff, students, parents, and community agencies in multiple languages to maximize parent engagement to assist with student academic progress. The school collaborates with family and community agencies by having data dialogue to determine areas of training and needs to support student achievement. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special populations are our SWD's and ENL's. We are working to ensure all programs needs are met and maximize their learning experiences. The needs of our ENL students are reading, writing and decoding. The needs of our SWD population is comprehension and computation. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. West Bronx Academy made the most progress in in the following areas: Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers, and Effective Leadership. Our focus for this school year is to improve in the following areas: Trust and Strong Family-Community Ties. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X243 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 607 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 40 9 12 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 26 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 91.1% % Reduced Lunch 12.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 77.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 2% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 83% 75% 85.7% 1.6% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 119 117 89.4% 3.5% 26.0% 18.1% 1.8% 0.7% 6 17% 5.1 11.8% 43% 82% 84% 84.0% 16% N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YES NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per New York State, we must have a graduation rate of 80% or above. We continue to strive to exceed the goals set by the State. Based on our data, our strength for Rigorous Instruction are the following: High School Graduation rate, Regents passing rate in ELA, and US History, and in our MS 65% of our 8th graders earned high school credits. The following Regents Exams will be the focus for this school year in the high school: Algebra and Global. In the Middle School we will focus on the NYS Mathematics exam as well as the attendance rate. Based of the data from our NYS School Report card, in our MS , our our % proficiency rate in ELA is 34% and our Math is 12%. As per the NYCDOE School dashboard our students proficient in ELA has increased from approximately 10% - 34% between 2014 - 2017. Our Math scores has fluctuated during the same span of time. In Math, our data reflects a 3% increase, a 3% decline and and then a 6% increase. In both Math and ELA, our female students are out performing our males. More specifically, In ELA our female students are 44% proficient compared to our males at 24% proficiency. In Math, our female students have 13% proficiency in comparison to ur males at 11%. Additionally in our MS, our Non - English Learners are 27% proficient in comparison to our English Language Learners at 5%. Based on the data from the NYCDOE School Performance Dashboard 2016 - 2017th, our MS attendance metrics is 83% surpassing the city average by 2%, and our comparison group by 8%. Our priority needs that will be addressed for our MS is to increase the proficiency rate in Math for all populations and continue the trend of increasing our ELA proficiency at a minimum of 5%. We will continue to identify the assess the needs of our students and implement specific strategies and skills to increase their performance. Based on the data from the NYCDOE School Performance Dashboard 2016 - 2017, our 4 - year graduation rate and our College and Career Readiness rates have steadily increased. In 2014, our graduation rate was 65%, to which we've increased to far above average at 87% for two consecutive years. Additionally, our College and Career Readiness Index has increased from 16% in 2014 to 47% in 2017, an overall increase of 31%. Our Regents metrics in ELA, Algebra, Global History, US History and Living Environment reflects that we are below average. More specifically, our overall regents completion has increased from 37% in 2014 to 46% in 2017. In ELA, we have increased 3%, in Algebra 12% over three years, Global History over three years. In US. History and Living Environment we have fluctuated as follows: U.S. History - 2014 -62%, 2015 - 70%, 2016 - 70% and 2017 - 67%. Living Environment - 2014- 58%, 2015 - 60%, 2016 - 60%, 2017- 55%. We have decreased by 3% - 5% in these content areas. Our priority needs that will be addressed in our HS is to increase our attendance rate and our regents data in all content areas. 3  Our HS Attendance metrics, has fluctuated over the last 3 years with our lowest percentage in 2017 at 53%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 30, 2019, there will be a minimum of 2% increase in High School Graduation rate for Cohort 2019 from 85.6% - 87.6%. This goal will be measured via the RGCS report in ATS and STARS transcripts. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ELA and Math teachers will implement the use of Rubicon Atlas to align CCLS standards with the curriculum. ELA and Math teachers will attend CCLS Professional Development sessions provided by NYCDOE, New Visions and other vendors. Assistant Principals will attend Professional Development sessions provided by the Affinity group, CSA, and the NYC DOE to ensure that all subgroups are receiving adequate services. ELA Teachers Sept. 2018- Assistant Principals June 2019 ELA & Math Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals All High School students are encouraged to attend 5 Saturday sessions of Regents Preparation in the weeks leading up th the Regents exams in January and June. Students in grades 9 - 12 All High School students are encouraged to make up credits by taking PLATO courses at the end of their school day. Students in grades 10 - 12 Dec. 2018/ Jan. 2019 May 2019/ June 2019 Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Advisory Program for students in grades 9 - 12. Students in grades 9 - 12 Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals Strive for College program meets weekly with 11th and 12th grade students to provide guidance and support in their quest for college. Students in grades 11 - 12 Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals Parents of students in Cohort will be invited to attend a Senior Information meeting that will detail the requirements needed to graduate and all Senior activities. Parents of Cohort 2019 Oct. 2018 Assistant Principals Parents will be invited to meet with the 12th grade Guidance Counselor to discuss credit accumulation, Regents, SAT, and college and career readiness. Parents of Cohort 2019 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Guidance Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will receive monthly letters for the MS and HS departments in addition to calendars to highlight key dates. Parents will also be informed during monthly parent meetings in addition to Parent Teacher conferences. The 5  Assistant Principals of the MS and HS will oversee this process while offering support to our newly hired Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers and other staff will conduct after school enrichment and tutoring sessions that seek to provide a deeper understanding of the concepts that are covered in the school day. Students are not only provided with the help they need for in class assignments, but also they have an enriched understanding. The funds to support the teachers and clubs are provided by the Title I SWP Sequester /2010 Census, TL Strong Schools Strong Communities HS, Title III, and Private Grants. This money is used to fund clubs, after school programs, enrichment, and the Achieve 3000. The funds will also be used to pay per session to supervisors (Principal and Assistant Principals) who supervise the programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will evaluate the data from the Regents exam results in January, scholarship data, quarterly exams, marking period grades and other relevant data to determine and implement all necessary support to assist our students in accomplishing this goal. We expect to have 50% of the students in Cohort 2019 have at least 4 regents exams by the end of January. Additional supports will be discussed during weekly cabinet meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) In addition to reviewing our Regents results, scholarship data, marking pd and report card data, we will utilize the data from the NYC School report card, NYC School Survey and our Quality Review to determine our growth, needs and next steps. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In review of our data, we have identified that we provide different opportunities for our students to engage in several groups such as student council, Boys/Girls united, JROTC, Gemini Club, and Art Clubs. In addition, we have several sports for our MS and HS students as part of CHAMPS and PSAL. The HS sports are Baseball, Basketball, Track, and Volleyball. In the MS we have Flag Football, Swimming, Basketball, and Baseball. In addition we have campus-wide intramural sports such as Basketball and Flag Football. The focus for the school year is to develop a MS advisory program to address social-emotional issues and bullying. To expand the instructional day for our 8th graders so they can take advanced courses in Math, Science, and Social Studies that allows them to earn HS credits. In the HS we need to expand our clubs and after-school activities to include the National Honors Society, Gear-UP, and College Now courses. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of 3% on the number of students who meet all 8 th grade promotional requirements from 89% to 92%. This goal will be measured by the information entered in the PDEC screen in ATS and review of the scholarship data in HSST. We expect to have at least 65% of the students passing their core courses (ELA, SS, Science, and Mathematics) by February 2019. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in grades 6 – 8 will receive block schedules and small group instruction based on their performance level. Our ENL students will receive push in and pull out services to address their needs. Level 1 - 2 ELA and/or Math Sept 2018– May 2019 Students in grades 6 - 8 are mandated to attend the after school tutoring if they receive a Level 1 or 2 on their ELA and/or Math exams in Spring 2018. Our ENL and SWD poulations are mandated to attend tutoring in a small group setting. Level 1 and / or 2 on State assessments Oct. 2018 - March 2019 Students in grades 6-8 will attend monthly Town Hall meetings to discuss promotional criteria, study skills, and other relevant information to address any academic/ social skills needed All students in grades 6 - 8 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Students will have the opportunity to become involved in after school recreational programs such as ACDP (dance, sewing art, healthy living), basketball, baseball, swimming, and cheer leading. Research shows students who are involved in extra curricular programs show increased academic success. All students in grades 6-8 Sept. 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals Assistant Principals Assistant Principals, Teachers and Guidance Counselors Assistant Principals At risk students have the opportunity to participate in the GEMINI program with our SPARK program. Students meet weekly to have discussions, journal writing, schedule educational trips and plan school wide events. All At Risk students in grades 6 - 8 Sept. 2018- June 2019 Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator will facilitate and /or arrange parent workshops geared towards teaching parents strategies to support their children and our school community. The parent workshops will occur monthly on Community night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  Teachers and other staff will conduct after school enrichment and tutoring sessions that seek to provide a deeper understanding of the concepts that are covered in the school day. Students are not only provided with the help they need for in class assignments, but also they have an enriched understanding. The funds to support the teachers and clubs are provided by the Title I SWP Sequester /2010 Census, TL Strong ELA/ Math Support, Title III, and Private Grants. This money is used to fund clubs, after school programs, enrichment, and the Achieve 3000. The funds will also be used to pay per session to supervisors (Principal and Assistant Principals) who supervise the programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will review the attendance heat map, PBIS, and monthly ATS reports data, quarterly exam data and all data generated from the tests and quizzes from the tutoring program to monitor student progress. In addition to discussing student progress during academy, cabinet and department meetings. We expect to have at least 65% of the students passing their core courses (ELA, SS, Science, and Mathematics) by February 2017. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance heat map, PBIS, and monthly ATS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In review of our data we noticed that we have declining credit accumulation for the last three years. Teachers need to consistently ensure instructional practices are organized around plans that address all student needs. School leaders have provided teachers with PD on CCLS-aligned curricula implementation in core content areas as well as training on questioning and inquiry protocols, but the implementation of strategies that support students with disabilities and ENL's are limited. Teachers need to consistently use data to inform planning or to involve students in the ownership of their own learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a minimum increase of 3% in the number of students in Cohort 2021 who earned at least 10 credits in the first year of high school from 83% to 86%. This goal will be measured via STARS Transcripts. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Students in grade 9 will receive additional instruction on mathematics, writing, or technology. Students will be grouped according to their 8 th grade ELA and Mathematics performance. Students in grade 9 will meet weekly with their adviser to review credits, expectations and credit accumulation. Teachers will also implement the Career Zone curriculum to teach career planning. Cohort 2020 Sept. 2018 - Assistant Principals June 2019 Cohort 2020 Sept. 2018 - Assistant Principals June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will provide phone calls to parents in addition to texts via Class DOJO. The parents will have numerous opportunities through the Parent Association, Parent Teacher conferences, Open House and other activities throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers and other staff will conduct after school enrichment and tutoring sessions that seek to provide a deeper understanding of the concepts that are covered in the school day. Students are not only provided with the help they need for in class assignments, but also they have an enriched understanding. The funds to support the teachers and clubs are provided by the Title I SWP Sequester /2010 Census, TL Strong Schools Strong Communities HS, Title III, and Private Grants. This money is used to fund clubs, after school programs, enrichment, and the Achieve 3000. The funds will also be used to pay per session to supervisors (Principal and Assistant Principals) who supervise the programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1  In January 2019, we will review marking period, scholarship, and attendance data to determine what additional supports we need to implement to support our students during our department, cabinet, attendance and SIT meetings. We expect that 70% of the students in cohort 2022 earn at least 5 credits by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. marking period, scholarship, and attendance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the data from our School Quality Snapshot 2016 - 2017, our school leadership is effective. In comparison to the city, 95% of our teachers agree that the principal communicates a clear vision and 92% of our parents feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. Overall 90% of the surveyors responded positively about the school leadership. Our leadership has contributed to our high attendance rate, however we have a small number our students who consistently Our school attendance average has been in the 80th percentile for some years. We are consistently striving to increase our attendance rate. In our action plan, we will develop strategic ways to address their sporadic absenteeism. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a minimum of 1% increase in student attendance rate from 90% to 91%. This goal will be measured via the RESI report in ATS. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The attendance team meets regularly to discuss intervention strategies for students who have attendance issues, to track daily attendance patterns, and to contact the homes of students who have chronic absenteeism. The school leader funds a SPARK counselor position who will work with staff and will counsel students regarding substance abuse. Positive Behavioral innovation and/or transformation for the students, staff and parents of West Bronx Academy for the Future. The Attendance Heat Map will be implemented to track and monitor student attendance. In conjunction with the Heat map, members of the attendance team will be notified via email if a student their assigned to is absent. The team member will be responsible for calling the student(s) home and notifying the parent and child of the students absence. Individual interventions will be made at that point. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? At Risk Students Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal At Risk Students Sept. 2018- June 2019 Principal All Students, Staff Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal All Students Sept. 2018 - Principal June 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Parent Coordinator and the active parents on our SLT will lead the way to encourage our parents to enlist in leadership opportunities. New Visions for Public Schools has implemented a program that our parents can take part in call the Parent Leadership Institute Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Assistant principals will attend professional development sessions provided by the Affinity group to ensure all subgroups are receiving adequate services. Assistant Principals will also work very closely with the ESL and Special Education Coordinators to monitor student schedules, services, and other support required by individual students. Teachers will administer baseline assessments gain, monitor, and review attendance, dean referrals, and scholarship 4  data. Students identified as at-risk must attend additional instruction at the end of the day. The funds used to pay for this action plan will be Tax Levy, Title I SWP . Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will evaluate the data from our attendance heat map, PBIS, and monthly ATS reports in January 2018 to determine what additional supports we need to implement to support our students. We expect our school-wide attendance rate to be at 90% for the fall semester (September through January). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. attendance heat map, PBIS, and monthly ATS reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In review of our 2016 -2017 Quality Snapshot, 76% of our parents responded positively to questions about Strong Family - Community ties. The breakdown revealed what areas we need to focus on and what areas we need to continue to grow. We will aim to met or exceed the city percentage in communicating with our parents.  Our areas of strength are as follows: 84% of our parents feel that our teachers understand families' problems and concerns. 91% of teachers say that the teachers at our school work closely to meet the students needs.  Our area in need of improvement is : 79% percent of our parents say our school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their students learn. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will improve our overall percentage by 4% from 76% to 80% in Strong Family - Community Ties. We will specifically focus on communicating to parents how to help their child learn and providing evidence that our teachers understand our families' problems and concerns. We will measure it against the city's percentage in both of these elements. 6 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal and Assistant Principals, Hiring Committee (Admin, Teachers, Students) Parents Winter 2018 Students, Parents Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Attendance Team Parents. Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Administration, ACDP Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 10X243 will hire a Parent Coordinator to provide be a direct resource to our families. He/ She will serve as the liaison between the staff and parents. Our parent coordinator will be tasked with surveying our parents needs and providing workshops on all relevant topics to ensure our students progress thereby maximizing their potential. 10X243 has redesigned our Attendance Outreach to improve our over all attendance rate and to keep parents informed on their child's attendance. We have implemented the use of the attendance heat map in which members of the attendance team receive emails notifying them of the absences of specific students in their targeted range, The members of the team call the home to inform the parents of their child's absence and to keep abreast of any family problems that may contribute to the child's absence. Depending on the circumstances for the absence, we meet discuss interventions the school can provide i.e. referral to Montefiore Health Clinic, Guidance Counselors, etc. 10X243 is partnered with the community based organization ACDP (Association for the Progression of Dominicans). ACDP provides after school programs to our Middle School students. The activities include: Dance, Fashion, Urban Creations, Healthy Living and Art, Recreation Sewing, ACDP has also implemented new activities: Parent Advisory Board, Adult Workshops (i.e. job readiness, tax preparation, immigration), Participant (Student) Council (after school participant legislative body) and a Toy Drive. These program enhancements are designed to strengthen our school - family relationships. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. ACDP provides limited supported however we will try to build on the development of more opportunities to support family and community engagement. Montefiore Hospital has also supported us with trips, workshops to support our families. Our parent coordinator and our Middle School counselor will work very closely to ensure our students and families receive the necessary services. Our assistant principals, Kisha Anthony and Christopher King, will be responsible to oversee the implementation of ACDP's programs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy Parent Coordinator funds, Other - ACDP (DYCD funds) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. To monitor our progress of improvement planning we will do the following: our Parent Coordinator will participate in our weekly cabinet meetings to update the cabinet our needs and concerns of our families. Our attendance teams will continue to meet weekly to review attendance rates and design interventions/ incentives. Our community based organization will update our SLT team during our monthly meetings and in regard to the attendance of our students and families who participate in our after school activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The data from the School Quality Snapshot, Attendance Heat Map Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) At risk - Level 1 and Level 2 on State assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Academic Tutoring - skill building, guided reading Small Group instruction Sub-groups - SWD's/ Ell's Castle Learning Plato Individual Individual Mathematics At risk - Level 1 and Level 2 on State assessments Academic Tutoring - skill building, guided reading Small Group instruction Science Social Studies Sub-groups -SWD's/ Ell's Castle Learning At risk - Level 1 and Level 2 on State assessments Plato Academic Tutoring - skill building, guided reading Sub-groups -SWD's/ Ell's Castle Learning At risk - Level 1 and Level 2 on State assessments Plato Academic Tutoring - skill building, guided reading Sub-groups -SWD's/ Ell's Castle Learning At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Guidance Counselor Plato Individual and Group Counseling Individual Individual Small Group instruction Individual Individual Small Group instruction Individual Individual Small Group or one-to-one When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After-School During/After-School During/After-School SaturdaySchool After-School During/After-School During/After-School SaturdaySchool After-School During/After-School During/After-School SaturdaySchool After-School During/After-School During/After-School SaturdaySchool During the school day 9 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 0  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 52 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide them with school supplies and clothing to help be prepared for learning. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). non applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 1  non applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. non applicable 2  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. West Bronx Academy provides its pedagogical staff with an array of resources to increase teacher effectiveness and maintains a high standard of education. All teachers take part in Inquiry Team work once per week in both departmental and grade level structures. They are empowered to serve as mentors for at-risk students and are supported by both administration and the schools PSO New Visions. Some lead teachers participate in professional development workshops and turnkey the information to the teaching staff on a regular basis. West Bronx Academy has developed partnerships with local colleges that provide student-teachers, and professional development and technical support. By developing relationships with colleges we contact the teacher preparation programs to recruit teachers. Also, New Visions, our PSO has sent names of potential candidates for possible vacancies. Our Assistant Principals attend the NYC hiring fairs. All teaching staff members participate in professional development sessions pertaining to Common Core State Standards and our math department actively participates in the New Visions special CCSS math program named A2I. This program provides support for the math department in understanding the common core standards in math and trains teachers in how to develop and deploy these lessons. Newly hired teachers are provided a mentor who meets weekly with the teachers to address any and all issues that may occur. ● The school created common planning time where teachers can plan thematic units or coordinate the learning experiences for all students, including those with special needs. ● The school will create a bridge where teachers can be directly involved in developing their pedagogy through the Danielson Model. 3  ● The school provides professional development opportunities for teachers, paraprofessionals and other staff within the Danielson framework. ● The school facilitates professional development or conferences to develop lead teachers, Data-specialists or content specialists. ● We have created and maintain a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and teachers, and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians. Assistant Principals invite candidates to be interviewed by a committee, which includes: Administrators, teachers, staff and students. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers, assistant principals, and paraprofessionals receive professional development in different forms. Once a month, teachers receive professional development on major topics. Most of the sessions are lead by the administration, lead teachers, or other personnel. In addition, all members of the community are encouraged to attend professional development sessions held by the Affinity group. In addition, teachers are encouraged and allowed to participate in other professional development activities sponsored by outside organizations (for example: CSA, ELI, UFT, ASCD, etc.) Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Non - Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Non - Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Non- Applicable 4  4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet weekly by grade level and by content with the respective team leader and assistant principal. Team leaders and assistant principals are members of the school cabinet who meets weekly with the principal. During this time, information is given to all stakeholders. In addition, decisions are shared and communicated to the team. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 582,187.00 0 12,366.00 0 4,060,091.00 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A - E (4B) 4B 5A - E (4B) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 5  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. West Bronx Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. West Bronx Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 8  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) West Bronx Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 9  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 0  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 1  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 25 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: 1. ENL Literacy Intervention 2018-2019 This is an after-school program designed to support our ELLs in improving their reading levels and writing skills. These students will work with an ENL teacher and the language of instruction will be English. We will use a laptop cart to access the NYSED website, which provides practice Common Core type reading comprehension passages and exemplary written work. We will also use the Achieve 3000 program, which provides students with an opportunity to improve their reading in English using a computer-based curriculum, instruction, and assessment, supported by one-on-one conferences with the teacher. The program helps struggling readers by giving them diagnostics instantaneously to help them improve their reading skills. The goal of this program is to provide them with strategies to improve their listening, reading, and writing skills in English. We will focus on listening for understanding, reading for comprehension, writing argumentative essays, and writing for literary analysis. We will target students who are receiving ENL services and are at the entering and transitional levels, in grades 7 and 8. The program also ensures that struggling readers have an explicit and accelerated path to college and career readiness. This program will meet for 21 weeks after school for 2 hours from 3:15 PM to 5:15 PM, twice a week. The program will be taught by 1 licensed ENL teacher. We are currently targeting 25 students from October 3rd through June 15th. 2. ENL Literacy Intervention for Grades 9th and 10th 2018-2019 This is an after-school program designed to support our ENL's to become better readers, writers, and speakers of the English Language. These students will work with an ENL teacher and the language of instruction will be English. We will use a laptop cart to access the NYSED website, which provides practice Common Core type reading comprehension passages and exemplary written work. We will also use the Achieve 3000 program, which provides students with an opportunity to improve their reading in English using a computer-based curriculum, instruction, and assessment, supported by one-on-one conferences with the teacher. The program helps struggling readers by giving them diagnostics instantaneously to help them improve their reading skills. The goal of this program is to provide them with strategies to improve their listening, reading, and writing skills in English. We will focus on listening for understanding, reading for comprehension, writing argumentative essays, and writing for literary analysis. We will target students who are receiving ENL services and are at the entering and transitional levels, in grades 9th and 10th. The program also ensures that struggling readers have an explicit and accelerated path to college and career readiness. This program will meet for 21 weeks after school for 2 hours from 3:15 PM to 5:15 PM, once a of week as well as before school 7:30 AM to 8:15 AM 2 times a week for 45 minutes. The program will be taught by 2 licensed ENL teachers. We are currently targeting 25 students from October 2rd through June 13th. 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: In 2018 - 2019 , our ENL teachers will receive professional development sessions during the course of the academic school year 2018-2019, by our assistant principal or a qualified ENL specialist from New Visions. The meetings will take place from 1:20 PM to 2:20 PM, during our weekly professional learning sessions, at no cost to Title III. The professional learning opportunities for the teachers include ways to integrate technology into their units of study. In addition, the ENL teachers will work on Curriculum and Unit Planning with Common Core Learning Standards. Two of our teachers have taken additional courses and are working on their ENL extensions. Our ENL Coordinator also attends workshops sponsored by New Visions and turnkeys information obtained from these sessions to the other teachers. The ENL Coordinator attends Data Analysis training to estimate Title III AMAO's 1 and 2 status. In addition, we are planning to have our ENL Coordinator and teachers attend the WestEd Q-TEL Professional Development sessions sponsored by the DOE this upcoming year. The teachers of ENL will participate in inter-visitations arranged by the New Visions ELL specialist. The in-house sessions will occur weekly on Wednesdays. The professional development sessions sponsored by New Visions or the Department of Education will occur quarterly. Two inter-visitations will be scheduled through out the year. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: In 2018 - 2019, our ELL parents are encouraged to attend our ELL parent meetings in the evenings from 6 PM to 7:30PM ( September - June, bi monthly) where we discuss several topics. The first meeting is targeted to address the ELL identification process and the ENL program in the school; this session is presented by our ENL Coordinator, English to Speakers of Other Languages, during the month of September at the start of the new school year 2018-5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities 2019. The second is focused on helping their children assimilate into a new country and understand youth development; this session is provided by our ENL Coordinator and School Guidance Counselor every other month. The third is a meeting in which the parents learn to access our online grading system so they can manage the students' grades; this session is presented by our Guidance Counselor between the month of October and November. The fourth is a meeting we host once every other month from 5-6pm where the students share their progress and activities in the classroom with their parents. Lastly, on the third Monday of every other month, we have School Community Night in which we also teach parents about understanding the ENL Assessments and using the online resources such as Skedula. Most meetings are provided by our ENL Coordinator, English to Speakers of Other Languages, and supported by our ENL Teachers and Guidance Counselors. Parents are invited to attend by mail through bilingual communication, and also by personal phone calls in their native language. Translation services in Spanish are provided by our Guidance Counselor or ENL Coordinator during the workshops. The Attendance Teacher and Pupil Personnel Secretary translate all materials, as needed by our community, prior to the presentation or workshops. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12,216  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a 1500 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Facilitation of PD n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name West Bronx Academy Borough Bronx School Number 243 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Wilper Morales Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yarissa Avila Teacher/Subject Area Tanya English Rogers/ ELA Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider COURTNEY, FOWLKES Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Kisha Anthony Coach type here School Counselor Reyna Familia Parent Mireya Bruno Parent Coordinator Alexandra Reyes Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 8  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 587 Total number of ELLs 69 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.75% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? All ENLs take a baseline assessment in the beginning of each school year to target their weaknesses by modality. Spanish speaking ENLs take the Spanish LAB-R to assess their literacy skills in their native language. The NYSESLAT and NYC ENL Periodic Assessment from the prior year are also used as indicators to drive instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Flexibility in teacher scheduling to provide time for teachers to administer the baseline data. Teachers will evaluate the data during weekly professional development sessions to develop plans and target students needs. 9  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENL's by assessing how many students tested out of ENL services and how many students pass the NYS Regents exams. We will also implement the ELL Periodic Assessment in the beginning and end the year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers will be provided with weekly professional development time to analyze the data to inform instruction. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Overall the data patterns reveal that all ELL's across the grades still struggle with reading and writing. All beginners struggle with all modalities across the grades, specifically with speaking and listening. In rare occasions, some students are proficient in reading and writing but fail listening and speaking. Long term ELL's also tend to be ELL's s with learning disabilities. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? During monthly professional development session, ENL teachers will share their data with the general education teachers to inform instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Our school uses stand alone and integrated models of instruction. b. Our school stand alone model is 50 minutes of instruction in which the students receive English acquisition instruction carefully aligned with the ELA standards of instruction. Students have other content area subjects throughout the day in their daily schedules. The integrated model is implemented in groups that are grouped by homogeneous proficiency levels. Ell training for all of our staff will be ongoing to make them aware of differentiation strategies that can be implemented in order for ELL students to understand the content. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 0  We ensure that all of our ENL's receive the mandated number of minutes that each student needs. Both ENL teachers support the students either in a stand alone model once a day depending on their level and at least once a day in an integrated model. For example, one period in a stand alone model meets the mandated minutes, but exceeds them, to ensure that the student succeeds. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As such we offer development and support for content instruction in the native language or with native support. Instructional programs with high levels of rigor and support result in higher academic achievement for ELL' s. Effective strategies used across all content areas include: differentiation, small group instruction, explicit academic vocabulary instruction, scaffolding (modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, meta - cognitive development, text re-presentation). Our school focus is on reading and writing across all content areas. Studies show that native language development accelerates literacy gains in both the native language and English. As such, we offer language development and support for content instruction in the native language (or with native language support). The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the content area teachers in social studies, science and mathematics.This year the NYCDOE instructional focus as outlined in the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) is on reading and analyzing informational texts and writing opinions and arguments in response to texts across the content areas of ELA, math, science and social studies.The programs provide lessons which are differentiated to meet the students varying levels of ability and offer support in the development of language skills in the modalities of listening, speaking reading and writing. These are reinforced in every lesson. Lessons are also scaffolded in several ways, allowing all students multiple entry points and opportunities for success. Students work either independently or in homogeneous or heterogeneous groupings depending on the task as well as their abilities. Students also have access to bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to evaluate students in their home languages throughout the year we ensure students receive materials in both English and their home language. They receive vocabulary in both languages. We also have Achieve 3000 that support the students on their home languages and English. In order to assist students trans language skills, they are encouraged to speak in whatever language they choose when in turn and talks or working in pairs. Students are assessed in their ability to speak, read, and write in their native language. Additionally, we offer classes in native language arts in Spanish. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students are integrated into the demands of academic learning by receiving extra help from content area teacher and ESL teachers during class, after school, and on the previous years a Saturday Academy program. Our Saturday is no longer offers with our ESL teacher but with our ELA teacher.They are taught through visuals, charts, and Venn diagrams. They are allowed extra time to process their thoughts and put it in writing. In addition, tutoring is available during the week if they still need help in other academic subjects. b. New Comer ESL students are encouraged to build on their native language while receiving ESL instruction. How to use cognates and figure out what something means, reading comprehension strategies, and test taking strategies, such as process of elimination have been useful thus far in preparation for the ELA. c. Our ELL’s receiving 4 – 6 years are divided into three categories. Students that are SIFE, students that are Special Education 1  and students that have not received enough instruction to pass the NYSESLAT exam. Students are constantly encouraged to work on study skills and reading comprehension strategies. For the the students that are still struggling with the listening and speaking portion of the test, extra assistance and testing are provided. We differentiate our instruction by providing more writing and reading strategies across the content areas. We use writing frames as scaffolding, teaching strategic reading comprehension skills, teaching test taking skills, and creating graphic organizers and flow charts to help the ELL's gather their taught before writing. d. Invariably our long term ELL’s are struggling with reading comprehension and writing, most have attained a level of fluency in their speaking. For this population we work in conjunction with the literacy teachers on developing strategies for the student. The students are followed more closely; they are tracked through Datacation, and are given extra support. For our long term ELL's we use the CALLA approach (Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach) across the content areas. This helps them Increase motivation for academic learning and confidence in their ability to be successful in school, by evaluating their own learning and planning how to become more effective and independent learners. e. Former ELL's are permitted to receive testing accommodations for up to two years after testing out on the NYSESLAT. ELL strategies in instruction continue in all content area classes. Small group settings, extension of testing time, teacher collaboration on instruction and monitoring of ELL students progress continue. These students receive 90 hours of integrated instruction. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our ELL’s with special needs are serviced in conjunction with our Learning Academy. Instructors between the ELL and Special Education Learning Academy meet regularly to review student progress and set new goals for each student as well as identify necessary supports. In addition, the programmer, ELL Coordinator, and Special Education Teacher review their IEP's to ensure proper placement. Our school has common planning time in order to make sure co-teaching between special education teachers, content area teachers, and ESL teachers is successful. We plan together to differentiate, and group the students based on needs. We are using the program Write to Learn to help them accomplish these goals, the program provides content area material and helps them accelerate their English language development by providing instantaneous feed back on essays or short answer replies. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school has one group of 9th graders who are self-contained and the rest are in a mainstream program. We use co-teaching in the other graders, the content area teacher and special education teacher help to meet their diverse needs by multiple methods of differentiation, grouping by levels, by common need, etc. The ESL teacher also pushes into some classes that contain both a content area teacher and a special education teacher to provide the additional native language support for the rest of ELL's. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ELL students get targeted intervention in ELA through the Write to Learn program, which gives students an opportunity to improve their reading level using a computer adaptive program that selects readings at the appropriate grade level. The program gives them the diagnostics of what has to be improved instantaneously. Our ELL students receive additional instruction in math at the High School level through Plato learning software. Plato learning comes with advanced vocabulary assistance and enables students to work at their own pace. In middle school after school help is available for math. In our Social Studies classes our teachers provide our ELL's with vocabulary notebooks that are graphic, that contain the terms and illustrations, as well as teacher created workbooks to aid in understanding of the curriculum. A great focus on visuals and graphic organizers are put in place to ensure the grasp of the content. In our Science classes students use vocabulary picture 2  cards, along with the usage of videos to implement lessons, hands on lab work, and an annual Science Fair, in which all of our students, including ELLs participate in. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We are considering implementing a History enrichment program for ELL students as their results on the state exams continues to lag behind all other tests including ELA. The students also have a Regents Prep courses in their daily schedule if they have failed them before. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are encouraged to join after school activities. When students enroll we emphasize to parents the importance of being an active member of the school community. Students that stay after school and work with one of our 16 different programs tend to do better academically. It is especially important for ELL students to associate with students who are not ELL’s for social and language acquisition. We offer bi weekly after school tutoring 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. As a technology school we rely on Smart Boards, portable language labs, laptop computers, and video cameras to assist in instruction for all students. Our SIFE students and New Comers benefits greatly from our portable language labs that can be used to increase listening skills as well as reading skills with programs such as Read 180. Our 4-6 year ELL's and our Long Term ELL's are given more of an opportunity to work with our laptop computers to use special programs we have in place to increase their learning, such as Write to Learn and Teaching Matters. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native Language support is predominately delivered through our world languages department who teach Spanish and French. We use their (Spanish) native language to help ELL's understand English, by using their prior knowledge of some vocabulary words and implementing them in cognates, root words, suffixes and prefixes. Word to word glossaries are provided in more than one language to students across the content areas, and in addition we also provided them with literature books in their Native Languages. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources correspond to our ELL population’s ages and grade levels. The curriculum is aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards, which embeds grade and age appropriate standards. As the ENL teachers plans and designs lessons for the ELL students close attention is given to the learning goals for each student and benchmarks are established which will be used to closely monitor the progress of the ELL student. These benchmarks are based on what is age and grade appropriate as per the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? As a technology school we rely on Smart Boards, portable language labs, laptop computers, and video cameras to assist in instruction for all students. Our SIFE students and New Comers benefits greatly from our portable language labs that can be used to increase listening skills as well as reading skills with programs such as Read 180. Our 4-6 year ELL's and our Long Term ELL's are given more of an opportunity to work with our laptop computers to use special programs we have in place to increase their learning, such as Write to Learn and Teaching Matters. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 3  Newly enrolled ELL learners are assisted by a mentoring program we have in place, where one advance or proficient ELL is paired up with a new ELL. He or she helps them navigate throughout the school and helps them translate during class. We called them big sib, and little sib. We have frequent meetings to see how things are going, what are they finding to be different or difficult and what they need help in. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELL students are offered French and Spanish as language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. All of our teachers and guidance counselors receive ELL professional development sessions during the course of the year. Our PD sessions focus on the implementation of ELL/ESL strategies that are used to increase achievement in the four components of language: listening, speaking, reading and writing. In addition, our school has provided our teachers and faculty, including, paraprofessionals, psychologist, therapist, and Parent Coordinators, with the opportunity to attend weekend training sessions through Pearson’s Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP). All Teachers are also encouraged to attend outside training provided by the Department of Education and the UFT. Two of our teachers have taken courses or are working on their ESL extension. Our ELL Coordinator is also available to train and as well as turn key information obtained from PD sessions, best practices, and the rules that govern ELL's. We have the PD sessions scheduled for January 31, 2019and February 1, 2019. 2. As a 6 – 12 school, the ELL Coordinator trains and aids the guidance counselors, attendance teacher, and other staff who closely work with ELL's with important information regarding the placement of ELL's. These include information, such as, NYSESLAT levels, formative and summative student data, and teacher anecdotes that will facilitate placement and transition from year to year. 3. ELL training for all of our staff will be ongoing to make them aware of what different types of differentiation strategies that can be implemented in order for ELL students to understand the content. We will send out our ELL Coordinator so she can present us with new insight, as well as obtain training from New Visions on addressing the needs of ELL's. Some of the topics presented during training sessions are the implementation of ESL strategies, scaffolding and differentiation of units studies and lessons. In order to determine who has obtained training and completed the 7.5 mandated hrs, the ELL Coordinator will provide the school administrator with a signature sheet that will be maintained on file in the main office and the ELL Coordinator’s records. As a 6 – 12 school, the ELL Coordinator trains and aids the guidance counselors, attendance teacher, and other staff who closely work with ELL's with important information regarding the placement of ELL's. These include information, such as, NYSESLAT levels, formative and summative student data, and teacher anecdotal that will facilitate placement and transition from year to year. 4  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ELL training for all of our staff will be ongoing to make them aware of what different types of differentiation strategies that can be implemented in order for ELL students to understand the content. We will send out our ELL Coordinator so she can present us with new insight, as well as obtain training from New Visions on addressing the needs of ELLs. Some of the topics presented during training sessions are the implementation of ESL strategies, scaffolding and differentiation of units studies and lessons. In order to determine who has obtained training and completed the 7.5 mandated hrs, the ELL Coordinator will provide the school administrator with a signature sheet that will be maintained on file in the main office and the ELL Coordinator’s records. ENL teachers will be encouraged to go to DOE and non DOE training on ELL practices. Non ENL teachers will receive professional development from ENL teachers on best practices for their classes, as well as be encouraged to go to outside ENL training. A record of all PD's and informational sessions both in and out of the building are kept in school files including agendas, sign in sheets and materials where applicable. ENL teachers also keep a record of all PD hours in a binder that contains the agendas from the PD’s they attend to ensure they get 50% of their 175 mandated hours. All other teachers keep agendas from any PD sessions regarding ELL’s in their own personal binders as well to ensure their 15% of their 175 mandated hours. All teachers will attend PD that are dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL’s. ENL teachers will also attend PD’s in language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL’s. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We have a Parent Association and a School Leadership Team. We believe in active parent involvement which will be encouraged continuously through newsletters, phone calls, emails, and family evenings. We organize activities based on the parental feedback and needs surveys. Through our PTA and SLT meetings we have invited parent to meet and discuss student needs. We hold a curriculum night where parents of ELL's are invited to attend the informational session during the Fall semester. In addition we have meetings with individual students and their parents to discuss the goals of the program, their child’s language development progress, their child’s English language proficiency assessment results, as well as their child’s language development in all their content area classes. There will be a record of who was in attendance during this meeting. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ELL parents are encouraged to attend our four ELL parent meeting evenings where we discuss the program and give the parents strategies in helping their students acclimate. Prior to our meetings we make phone calls and determine if anyone is in need of our translation services, if so we make the proper arrangements. In our meetings we discuss ways in which they can invest in their children's education. Such as, having an active role in their child's education: send notes to the teachers, make phone calls, and voice their opinions. Parents are also well informed on how to access Pupilpath online, a software, that shows them their child's progress in each class. 5  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Wilper Morales, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: West Bronx Academy School DBN: 10X243 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Wilper Morales Title Principal Kisha Anthony Assistant Principal N/A Parent Coordinator Yarissa Avila/ENL ENL/Bilingual Teacher Mireya Bruno Parent Tanya English-Rogers/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Denise Gokey/ELA Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Reyna Familial School Counselor Juan Mendez Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 12/15/16 12/15/16 12/15/16 12/15/16 12/15/16 12/15/16 12/15/16 12/15/16 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: West Bronx Academy Superintendent: Juan Mendez DBN: 10X243 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No ENL Coordinator/ Teacher Yes Yes Yarissa Avila * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. According to our data, the majority of our parents speak Spanish with a small percentage speaking Arabic, Bengali, Fulani, and Albania. In order to maintain effective open communication with parents we provide written translations of memos and other important documents for parents. Our Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, and ELL Coordinator work collaboratively to assess our school’s written translation and oral interpretation needs by examining the Home Language Surveys filled out by parents, analyzing ATS data, and interviewing parents. We will provide each parent who requires language assistance services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services with instructions on how to obtain such services. 9  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral In assessing our school's community's written translation needs, we examined the HLS, ATS data and by interviewing parents. After reviewing these documents, we found the more commonly spoken languages in our school were Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, and lastly Vietnamese and Korean. In considering the Chancellor's Regulations on Translations, our school needs to provide timely provision of translated documents through either existing in-house services or through the Translation and Interpretation Unit at the Department of Education. The findings of our parent’s needs were shared with our staff during our staff meetings and with our parents during PTA meetings. Spanish Arabic African English 100 100 100 85 2 5 85 2 5 85 2 5 85 2 5 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 0  1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. In order to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents most documents are translated in house by our school staff. These include Spanish Teachers, Parent Coordinator and ELL Coordinator. In the event that we do not have the required staff or volunteers to provide translations into the languages requested, we will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit at the Department of Education. This will ensure all parents and students receive these documents in a timely fashion and help bridge the communication between our school and home. September 2018 Oral and written translation via translators, newsletters, etc. Newsletters Calendar of Events Workshop Information for Parents and/ or Students Monthly Bi monthly Varies Written Written Written 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conferences, Open House, SLT/ PTA meetings, Principal, Assistant Principal's, Guidance Counselors and Dean's meetings with parents, Sept 2018 Oct 2018 March 2019 June 2019 Parent Teacher conferences, scheduled one to one meetings, and parent workshops September - October, and May - June Oral translation Oral translation Oral translation Open House SLT/ PTA meetings Monthly One on One scheduled meetings with various staff members Varies 1  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. School Messenger in their language and Oral translators Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff will be trained at the Professional Development workshops in September 2018 before the 1st day of school. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will provide each parent who requires services with written notification of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services with instructions on how to obtain such services. A sign in each of the covered languages will be posted in a conspicuous location near the entrance to the school indicating the room where a copy of the written notification can be obtained as an effort to maintain an open communication at home and school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent Survey, PTA meetings and one to one conversations when they visit the school. 2 
