2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 11X253 School Name: BRONX HIGH SCHOOL FOR WRITING AND COMMUNICATION ARTS Principal: TERRI LYNN GREY 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts 3211000011253 9 - 12 800 East Gun Hill Road Bronx, NY 10467 School Number (DBN): 11x253 718-944-5690 Fax: 718-944-5660 Phone Number: Terri Grey tgrey@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Terri Grey Andrew Nugent Virgin Munoz Meline Elleston Antaya Williams Tashanna Lawrence Tarek Zendani Maya Doyle, Beacon District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10467 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-401-1632 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10467 NSaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 608-0230 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Terri Grey Andrew Nugent Virgin Munoz Lashawn Jackson Antaya Williams Tarek Zendani Tashanna Lawrence Maya Doyle MelineElleston Rosalyn Brown Pauline Sampson *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  Nicola Currithers Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  ' 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Framework School Information and Mission Statement The Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts is a small community of life-long learners, readers and writers. Using the written word as a vehicle, students explore their world and learn to know themselves. They write across all content areas in order to master concepts and demonstrate understanding. We offer a college preparatory program and provide opportunities for creative writing, advanced study and opportunities in the fields of theatre, film, and communication arts. Students produce a variety of school publications and films to demonstrate and celebrate learning. We expect all of our students to graduate with a New York State Regents endorsed diploma within four years and be prepared for college or to enter the workforce. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Partnerships The Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts is a community of writers who pen plays,as well as fiction and non-fiction texts. Students write for school publications, participate in poetry slams, write scripts for school plays, make films, create songs, various works of visual art and photography, and choreograph dance. They also work with professional writers, actors and artists through our lead partner Epic Theatre Ensemble. This organization guides students in the exploration of the relationship between individuals and their society by studying Shakespeare and other canonical texts. Working with Epic Teaching Artists, students write and perform theatre productions that inspire and awaken civic engagement while examining issues of social justice and equity. Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts students also participate in Epic’s Shakespeare Remix ; which is an in-depth year-long after-school arts-in-education program. Furthermore, our students also collaborate with Community Word Project to publish a literary magazine, poetry and short story anthology, as well as to create murals reflecting current events and social justice issues. We also work with DC-TV to produce short films and documentaries. We have a partnership with Apple since being awarded a multi-million dollar grant as an Apple ConnectEd school designee. Accomplishments We have partnered with The Leadership Program (TLP) in order to provide direct counseling services to students who were chronically absent, more than 60% of the time, during the last school year using a program called RISE. We target ninth and tenth grade students to receive these outreach services as a strategic support to improve attendance, however some older students participate. We also offer counseling through our Young Women's and Men's Group using Open Door Arts in Education. We have also been awarded the School Improvement Grant. Additionally, we channeled school resources using our SIG grant to maintain an additional guidance counselor for a total of three school counselors to ensure that all students receive college and career, mandated and crisis counseling 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  at each grade level. Two of the school counselors run small counseling groups to address academic, attendance and social and emotional needs, while all three meet weekly with teachers . We also directed funding from the College Access Grant to a college access program called the NYU Advising Corps aimed at increasing college enrollment rates for our seniors. We achieved a 80% college acceptance rate.. As a result of earning the Apple ConnectED award, our school has been granted a comprehensive “one-to one technology solution” for every student and teacher. We will have an Ipad for every student, a Mac or an Ipad for every teacher and administrator, Apple software and an Apple TV for every classroom and professional development. We will be a part of a collective Apple ConnectED research effort to study the effects of technology in the classroom. This grant will allow us to widen our practice of using technology to support student learning. We also re-applied for and received several smaller grants to participate in DoE initiatives.We have a team that was accepted into theTeacher Leader Program to develop inquiry focused teacher teams and we will once again host a Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach who will assist with curriculum development and raising student engagement, which is our instructional focus this year. We also applied for and for an Achieve Now Academy in the amount of $35,000 to raise the achievement of our over-aged, under-credited students and students classifies as English language learners and students with disabilities. We have an Explore the Arts grant from the Frank Sinatra Foundation to offer a film and videography sequence at the school. We also received matching funds from the community Word Project too to run a film residency in three classes. Our school survey results in previous years showed that we exceeded the city-wide satisfaction average for all high schools, with 90 percent and above in instructional core, systems for improvement and school culture and this year’s preliminary results high results again. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We serve a high needs population with a significant number of our students entering 2 or more grade levels below, many with chronic attendance issues. In fact, 90% of our incoming freshmen earned a score of a 1 or 2 in math, and 90% earned a 1 or 2 in ELA. Our population includes 21.6% Students With Disabilities and 14.4% ELL students. The SWD students received their services in the classroom with an additional special education in their classrooms and the ELL students receive services with an additional ELL teacher in the classroom and as stand alone teacher 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Most Growth Effective school leadership, collaborative teachers, supportive environment, strong family-community ties and trust are the school's areas of strength. Tenet 4: The refinement of instructional practices and the alignment of curriculum to the common-core to increase student engagement coupled with the use of data to differentiate instruction, will produce a 5% increase in the 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  number of students who participate in Advanced Placement, and early college programs like College Now courses in the 2016-17 SY. We increased our college and career preparatory index from 8.8 to 15% in 2017. We increased the number of students in college preparatory programs from 26 to 58 students in 2017-18. By adding AP World History, to our existing courses of Spanish, ELA and Environmental Science, we raised our course participation to 26 in Fall 2016. Participation in the Advanced Placement Expansion Initiative and the addition of a third guidance counselor helped us to achieve this goal. Tenet 2: School leadership will use evidence-based systems (i.e. Danielson-aligned observation and inter-visitation, tri-state quality curriculum reviews, and looking at student work protocols and rubric-based) assessment to ensure that teachers and students are able to articulate the academic areas that need improvement school-wide. As a result, the school’s graduation rate will increase by 3 % from 67% in 2017 to 70% in 2018. By using common formative assessments to adjust instruction and focusing on raising student engagement we increased the percent of 2nd year students earning 10+ credits from 57.3% to 83.3%. Tenet 6: Increase the reciprocal communication with families and communities of students entitled to AIS using Skedula to improve their course passing rates by 5% in the 2016-17 SY. We exceeded the course passing rate with an increase of 7 % from 72% to 79%. Our course pass rate averaged 79% this school year, however again with a focus on strategies to raise student engagement and aligning curriculum and assessment to common core standards, we maintained a 79% course pass rate for the SY 2016-17. Challenges Tenet 3: Cohort-based inquiry teams will use student work analysis protocols and curriculum review procedures to promote greater consistency in differentiated planning so that lesson planning reflects purposeful grouping, students are challenged, and tasks accommodate different learning styles. As a result, there will be a 2% increase in the course passing percentage of the school’s lowest third for the 2017-18 SY. In 2016 we met this goal for our students in their first year in the lowest third population where credit accumulation increased from 68% to 70%. However, we did not meet this target for students in their second and third year. In 2016 while over 75% of our freshmen earned 10 or more credits , only 59% of our freshmen in the bottom third earned 10 or more credits. This is largely due to issues concerning attendance. In 2016 89.6% of our first year students earned 10 or more credits. The percentage of students in 3rd year earning 10+ credits decreased from 39.3 to 27.3 We have struggled with our Regents pass rates in January and June 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-P 13  Tenet 5: The revision of attendance systems and structures, as well as increasing the opportunities for parental involvement and engagement will result in a 3% increase in student attendance, to bring the yearly attendance to 83% by June 2018. Our attendance is at about 80% for the 2016-17 SY. We take a guidance approach to attendance using The Leadership Program and guidance outreach and intervention and this school year, our average attendance is currently 82 per cent. . Key Areas of Focus This year we will worked with our teachers to help them to: 1. understand how to use the Danielson-aligned evaluation feedback to set SMART professional goals related to improving the use of questioning and discussion to build student engagement and support formative assessment practices, which is our instructional focus 2. improve their use of assessments to collect data about student progress and use that data to modify instruction; 3. improve curriculum using appropriate rigor and CCLS-alignment; 4. provide students with the appropriate social-emotional supports; 5. improve communication with families and communities to provide additional student support. 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X253 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 338 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 11 11 6 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 10 14 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 68.0% % Attendance Rate 67.5% % Reduced Lunch 13.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 43.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.14 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 68% 55% 64.6% 2.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A YES YES Yes N/A 101 94 82.9% 0.9% 21.3% 47.0% 4.7% 2.1% 4 29% 5.2 N/A N/A 62% 59% 59.6% 8% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-P 15  2018-19 SCEP-P 16  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The debriefing statement from 2016 Quality Review reads that “  Planning of rigorous activities for students with disabilities and English Language Learners (ELLs) was evident throughout the school’s curricula. All lesson plans that were reviewed displayed the same level of rigor for all students with evidence of differentiation for students as needed. A United States history lesson plan had learning objectives that included students being able to define impeachment and to explain the grounds for impeachment of the President and Vice President. Although the rigor remained the same, students had opportunities to read the lesson materials at various reading levels and documents were translated for ELLs. In addition, students are also asked to watch two short video clips where the closed captions were turned on for ELLs to support students in their native language.  A review of lesson plans identified evidence of implementing the instructional shifts. A grade ten social studies lesson plan is designed to have students cite strong and thorough textual evidence and determine a theme or central idea of a text. A grade twelve economics lesson plan also addressed areas of the Common Core standards and the instructional shifts. The lesson plan addressed citing specific textual evidence and connecting insights gained from those specific details. Additionally, the lesson plan addressed performance tasks such as annotating and analyzing a document for clarity and comprehension. ”   2018-19 SCEP-P 17  The overall finding from the review was that “Curricula and unit plans are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and are regularly refined using student data. ” Since the Review, we implemented the Mastery Connect online system in order to ensure that our curriculum (scope and sequence and unit plans) is aligned to the CCLS and documented. We used the ATLAS system to ensure transparency in the curriculum and to ensure collaboration among the teachers. We also contracted with Innovative Designs in Education (IDE) in order to develop our professional learning culture around the formative assessment and the use of data and assessment in instruction. Furthermore, we continue to use Generation Ready consultants to provide curriculum mapping support, as well as to assist in the implementation of common formative assessment systems. We use the data to ensure that curricula are modified to include differentiation based on student achievement data , particularly for ELL’s and SWD’s. S This year we are exploring the potential of "Mastery Connect," an online tool that allows teachers to view standard mastery one student at a time, one standard at a time. This tool will allow us to build on the previous year's formative assessment practices and ensure that all teachers can use real-time data to modify their lessons. This year we are working with IDE and Apple to develop learner active, technology infused classrooms where raising student engagement is a main goal. We have contracted with Assessment Matters in order to provide guidance to our teacher leaders in designing common formative assessments and using Mastery Connect to this end. During our city quality review, held November 19, 2014, we received a proficient rating for 1.1,”ensuring engaging, rigorous, and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common core Learning Standards and or content standards.” The report states, “the school’s purposeful curriculum decisions build coherence, and data-driven task refinements promote cognitive engagement and college and career readiness for all learners.” “The school’s decision to use an online curriculum mapping resource is consistently building coherence across grades and contents and allows teachers to make instructional adjustments from student work and data results aligned to the needs of specific student groups.” The priority need that we have identified as a result is to have a planned, comprehensive school-wide interdisciplinary curriculum that incorporates common formative and summative assessment practices. We will use the assessment to provide specific feedback to our students and to modify the curriculum. We have worked to implement common formative assessments across all disciplines and we are working to implement Mastery Connect to build on successful curriculum practices. This year we have also identified questioning and discussion as the instructional focus and we are working with our teacher development coach and the UFT Teacher Center to provide support on implementing Socratic Seminar and Question Formulation Technique. This area was identified on our 2014-15 quality review as an area for growth for indicator 1.2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, faculty will expand our efforts in regards to providing timely and meaningful feedback (based on explicit criteria for success across classrooms) to students, as evidenced by a 5% increase in the number of 3rd year students earning 10+ credits, moving from 57.2% to 63.2%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All curriculum units will be aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards as evidenced by teacher lesson plans, unit plans and common assessments. Implementation of Mastery grading in Skedula to monitor standards mastery one student at a time, one standard at a time. All Teachers All students June 2018– June 2019 Principal and Professional Learning Committee Teacher teams will engage in protocols designed to examine levels of rigor and critical thinking skills demonstrated in student work products in order to the drive instructional decisions. All Teachers All Students September 2018 – June 2019 Teacher teams will engage in protocols to do data analysis to support individual student goal setting in core academic subjects. All teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Teachers will be engaged in 4 cycles of inter-visitations to emphasize instructional strategies and learning activities that drive teaching and develop specific goals and action plans for students and ensure regular and relevant data-based feedback to students so they can take more ownership of their learning. All Teachers September 2018– June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Principal Professional Learning Committee AP Math and Science Instructional Coach. Assessment Matters, once each term or 2 times for the school year Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Three times a year the parent coordinator will work with the teachers to institute parent workshops around student-led conferences and the use of Mastery grading in Skedula. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds for prep period coverages and per diem teachers so that teachers may attend off-site curriculum planning with Assessment Matters. Allocated funds for Mastery grading in Skedula and Innovative Designs in Education. Funds 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  allocated for Assessment Matters and for Teachboost Observation Feedback System using Focus set-aside funds. Allocated per session and per diem for 8 teachers for 12 days. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Every term the 10 th grade credit accumulation data will be collected and analyzed. Scholarship action plans will be created by teachers to address the gaps. By March 2019, we expect 10 th grade credit accumulation to be 75%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship action plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths The Quality Review debriefing statement reads “  The school has hired 2 college advisor who comes to the school two days per week. from college confident and a full time college advisor They work with students and monitor their progress during the college application process. In addition to this, students are given a college planning handbook which outlines much of the important information that students must know when preparing to apply for colleges. The handbook speaks to the timelines and deadlines, Scholastic Aptitude Test vs American College Test, the college essay, and includes a college application checklist that helps students stay organized throughout the process. Students and their families are given assistance throughout the process and the school offers workshops for parents to help them with completing the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). The school has a goal that all seniors will complete this application by February first and by December 20th, 38 percent of all seniors had either completed or started the application process. Over 80% of students in their 1st and 2nd year of HS earn 11+ credits 2018-19 SCEP-P 21    Leadership shares expectations with students and family’s by supplying them with a student and family handbook each year. The handbook is a 12-page document that shares the school’s mission and vision. It clearly outlines arrival procedures, the school bell schedule, a directory for the entire staff (with email addresses), graduation requirements, and many other important components. Additionally, the handbook shares with the students and families what the expectation for each student is: be at school, be on time, be prepared for class, be attentive, be cooperative, be courteous, be honest, be truthful and trustworthy, be reliable and dependable, be neat, be self-disciplined and be responsible. During the meeting with students, they referenced the handbook and shared how they are reminded by staff and other adults regularly to follow the core virtues of the code of conduct. Furthermore, parents reported receiving a copy of the handbook and found it very useful as it “listed a lot of the things we need to know so our kids can graduate on time.” Practices that are preparing students for college and careers are visible throughout the school. The school uses the Socratic method in many of the classrooms which allows students to engage in meaningful student discussions, while the teacher acts simply as the moderator and is part of the discussion, not leading it. All students in grades nine through twelve, take part in trips to visit college campuses so that students can begin to see what choices they have and what to look for in a college. Guidance counselors begin the “push in” process into classrooms as early as tenth grade and begin working with eleventh grade students on the creation of their personal statements, and share the many internship programs that are available to them, as well. The school has set high expectations for all students especially seniors. As of the date of this quality review, all 73 seniors have started their City University of New York applications with 60 out of the 73 completing their applications and are now awaiting a decision from the school’s admissions office. ” Since the Review, we have hired a parent coordinator and an additional school counselor for the wellness team so that one counselor is dedicated to providing mandated counseling and ensuring the academic success of our students with disabilities. The new IEP coordinator works closely with the school counselors to support academic success in SWD. The new ninth and tenth grade counselor has designed an advisory curriculum, trained the advisors on the curriculum, and supports the advisories directly and runs social and emotional, as well as academic success groups. Additionally, we expanded our after school offerings in order to engage more students using martial arts, instrumental music, visual art, and theatre. We require these students to attend tutoring in order to participate in the art enrichment activities. We created a social advocacy and leadership development program for our most at-risk students in order to ensure they are more successful academically by providing intensive small group counseling and a variety of enrichment activities. We are also implementing restorative justice practices and we offer Collaborative Problem solving training to our faculty and our students are trained as peer jurors. We have also strengthened the PBIS To address the need for social and emotional development systems that support academic success, we are using our weekly wellness meetings to capture and monitor data around the participation in all enrichment and tutoring activities, as well as using this information for the strategic programming of all students, specifically when it comes to building a college and career ready culture. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 FAFSA completion rate will increase by 5% from 67.2% to 72.2% through the use of the College Access for All grant to leverage the services of the NYU College Advising Center and the Evander Campus OSYD annual FAFSA parent night. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Use The Leadership Program to target the attendance and academic improvement of the chronically absent students who require AIS services. Together TLP works with the students, attendance team, the teacher teams and the families to establish trust. Chronically absent students 20 plus absences October 2018–May 2019 AP, Guidance and Organization , attendance monitored weekly Social Advocacy and Leadership Development Class and Achieve Now Academy to increase the participation of students requiring AIS services in enrichment and mediation efforts through our extended day program. The students and their families work with the teachers, consultants, administrators to ensure trust is established and students are more successful. the target population of the students in the Achieve Now Academy are students with disabilities, ENL, ESL students and students with low attendance who are undercredited and overaged. Using a strategic plan and data received from College Now to increase the recruitment of students for AP and college preparatory courses to establish a college and career going culture. Holding regular FAFSA completion events for students and their families with College Confident and the campus-wide OSYD committe at Evander. Overaged and under-credited, ages 16 and up October 2018-May 2019 AP, Guidance and Organization, ANA services monitored bi-monthly All on track students December 2018 – June 2019 AP Guidance and Organization and School Counselors, FAFSA completion monitored weekly AP Guidance and Organization, College Confident, application submission monitored monthly Increase the amount of students who complete the Common, CUNY and SUNY application and submit the application fee by offering fee waivers, subsidizing part of the application fee for students and using College Confident, consultant. All on track students September 2018– June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Evander Campus OSYD Team will host three meetings for parents including the FAFSA night, the College Fair , and the AP Fair. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds allocated for the Youth Development/ College Counseling consultant from College Confident. using Focus set-aside funds and funds allocated for The Leadership Program from the ANA grant. Funds allocated using Priority set-aside funds for before and after school enrichment activities materials and personnel. Allocated per session and per diem using Priority set-aside funds for the academic intervention and enrichment services. Funds allocated in supplies to assist with subsidizing college application fees. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. FAFSA completion rates will be monitored during each term by school counselors to ensure about a 2% increase each term. Hired Guidance Counselor Hired Parent Coordinator Hired College Access Advisor Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. . FAFSA completion reports can be checked weekly to monitor the effect of the FAFSA family events and parent outreach. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-17 Quality Review debriefing statement reads “  There are distributed leadership practices in place in many forms. Teachers are paired up with new teachers and act as teacher mentors. Mentors have opportunities to observe teachers and offer constructive feedback. Teachers attend professional development sessions on and off campus regularly. Teachers are then able to turnkey that learning to their colleagues. Teachers shared that they know that if there is a certain training they would like to attend, school leadership would support them and send them with the expectation that the information they learn is then distributed to their colleagues. Additionally, teacher leaders are part of the instructional leadership team and attend regular meetings with school leadership. Teachers who are part of this team and who show an interest in taking on a leadership role, are invited to attend the leadership retreat that takes place every summer. During these meetings, the team looks at school goals and new initiatives and programs.  Teacher’s inquiry teams meet regularly to analyze student data and instructional practices. During a science team meeting, teachers met to analyze a recent assessment that was given to students. Teachers began the structured meeting by first taking time to review the student assessment and make inferences regarding the student work. Teachers made several noticings such as that some questions had a wide variety of responses and how the majority of students seemed to answer certain questions incorrectly. Teachers also noticed how many students were able to construct a hypothesis but struggled when it came time to analyze the data during lab exercises. Teachers made suggestions to address the issues observed. Suggestions included, reviewing the scientific method worksheet the students use to check for areas that can be improved. Teachers also looked to 2018-19 SCEP-P 25   develop a worksheet that students can use as a reference that will help them stay focused and draw out important sections of each question and that will let them see what is important with each part of the experiment. Since the Review, the school has implemented a system for using formative and summative assessments to differentiate instruction in the classroom and to create individual goals for all students. In fact, the school was rated proficient on assessment in the 2016 quality review and the impact is “the school’s use of common assessments, data analysis and feedback allows teachers to determine student progress towards established goals and adjust instruction accordingly to meet the needs of all students. We continue to focus on including specific goals in lesson plans using personalized learning plans based on student standards mastery. During the 2016-17 SY, 78% of our teachers demonstrated effectiveness in using assessment in instruction as a result of incorporating the LATI classroom. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher leaders, will build teachers team capacity to implement effective assessment practices as evidenced by a 5% increase in the number of teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective on Danielson component 3d (Using Assessment in Instruction) as well as a 5% increase in the number of students passing the Global and Living Environment Regents. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). On-going professional learning on formative assessment and students engagement from our coach, our instructional coach and Innovative Designs in Education and Assessment Matters. Check for Understanding questions in all lesson plans. All teachers Curriculum and assessment support from consultants. Bi-monthly teacher team meetings and/or teacher led professional development using to examine student in particular students with IEPs, ELLs, and 504s. All teachers Teacher Development Coach who works in a non-evaluative capacity at no cost to school through grant funding to support the formative and summative assessment practices of teachers PD Committee will analyze and monitor teacher MOTP ratings and make informed decisions develop PD Calendar 3b – Parent and Family Engagement New to school, profession, non-tenured and teachers on TIP All teachers Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Principal Professional Learning Committee, monthly Principal Professional Learning Committee, monthly Principal Professional Learning Committee, monthly Principal Professional Learning Committee, monthly How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Twice a year the parent coordinator and the administrators will host Regents prep workshops for the families geared to their students. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Focus set-aside funds allocation for Innovative Designs in Education and National Training Network and Assessment Matters. Allocated per session for 8 teachers for 10 days for 2 hours using set-aside Priority funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Team Leaders Minutes Sample Student work Consultant Minutes Professional Development Agenda Teacher Work products Regents Data in January Teacher Observation Reports Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson observation reports in ADVANCE will be used to assess progress on 3b three times a year in December, March and June. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-17 Quality Review debriefing statement reads, “ School leadership shared that this year they were making a concerted effort to target new teachers and have set up a new teacher institute for them that takes place monthly. In addition, resources have been set aside for several consultants to come in throughout the school year to work with new teachers. Administration works closely with new teachers to offer them additional support. These teachers feel very supported and know that they can go to administration whenever they have any questions or concerns. During the teacher meeting, teachers shared that new teachers are especially given “plenty of support.” Teachers shared that administration is always encouraging teachers especially new teachers, to visit colleagues and learn best practices. Administration shares with new teachers those colleagues that they feel they can learn the most from and can help them in the specific areas they need growth in. " The overall findings are that the school leader makes strategic decisions to assess programmatic, human and fiscal resources, such as adding three terms and embedding the 37.5 minutes in the school day to enable longer classes to allow for greater content depth and increased instructional time. It is also noted that the school leader has a plan to analyze and support the improvement of teacher practices. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  The next steps are to develop and support a common language to describe the school vision, goals, and practices to enable and collective ownership of all priority initiatives. During our November 2014 quality review, it was noted that students, staff and parents were able to speak with a unified voice about the mission and vision of the school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, school leaders will continue leveraging the work of our Questioning and Discussion Study Group teacher team to improve teacher practices of questioning and discussion in the classroom. Evidence of success will be a 5% increase in the number of teachers rated Effective or Highly Effective on component 3b of the Danielson framework from 61% to 66% and an increase of 0.2 in the overall average rating on 3b from 2.76 to 2.96. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Minimum of 4 observations using the Danielson framework supported by the Teachboost system and ADVANCE. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal AP, Math and Science Professional learning sponsored by Innovative Designs in Education and Instructional coaches addressing component 3b of the Danielson Rubric All teachers Professional learning using the Teacher Development coach and National Training Network for Math. 2 monthly visits by the consultant with written feedback to teachers Department Teams September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Supervisors will provide specific, targeted and actionable feedback that teachers can use to readily improve practice. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 AP, Guidance and Organization IEP coordinator Principal Principal AP, Math and Science Principal AP, Math and Science 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Twice a year the School Leadership Team we will host open houses for families to come observe the strategies in class. Parents will be invited to participate in Teacher Inter-Visitations Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Priority funds for Innovative Designs in Education using Priority set-aside funds and funds for Teachboost. Per diem and coverages to facilitate group collaboration Consultant Fees Common Planning time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Evaluation of observation data from 3bdon the Danielson Framework, using assessment in instruction to see a 50% improvement in the number of teachers rated effectively on 3b. MOTP Tracker By February 2019, mid-year conferences to assess growth in raising using assessment in instruction and designing coherent instruction on the Danielson Observation Dashboard Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson ratings on ADVANCE will be used to assess progress during each term. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the School 201-617 School Survey, when parents were asked to answer the following question the response rate was as follow: How effective does the school partner with families to support students success. Outreach to Parents 89% 3% higher As compared to the Borough average 2% higher As compared to the City average 2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Parent Involvement in School 83% 3% higher As compared to the Borough average 3% higher As compared to the City average The debrief from the 2016 Quality Review stated "  Leadership shares expectations with students and family’s by supplying them with a student and family handbook each year. The handbook is a 12-page document that shares the school’s mission and vision. It clearly outlines arrival procedures, the school bell schedule, a directory for the entire staff (with email addresses), graduation requirements, and many other important components. Additionally, the handbook shares with the students and families what the expectation for each student is: be at school, be on time, be prepared for class, be attentive, be cooperative, be courteous, be honest, be truthful and trustworthy, be reliable and dependable, be neat, be self-disciplined and be responsible. During the meeting with students, they referenced the handbook and shared how they are reminded by staff and other adults regularly to follow the core virtues of the code of conduct. Furthermore, parents reported receiving a copy of the handbook and found it very useful as it “listed a lot of the things we need to know so our kids can graduate on time.” More and enhanced training is needed for families to understand how to read, use and analyze school and student data from Skedula/ Pupil Path and to effectively support student success. Increase communication about student progress and for family to monitor their child's progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the parent engagement team will work to increase the number of parents registered in PupilPath, providing access to real-time teacher communication, grades, attendance, and weekly bulletins, resulting in a 2% increase in the percentage of students with 90+% attendance, moving from 53.1% to 55.1%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Implement trainings on Skedula at all parent and teacher conferences Monitor and Evaluate Skedula usage among parents In order to increase trust, we will implement inquiry meetings with parents of students in our inquiry population Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All parents September 2018- June 2019 AP, Parent Coordinator Inquiry target population students November 2018-June 2019 AP, Math and Science Principal Train students to use Skedula and monitor and evaluate usage. implement after school tutoring and enrichment and Saturday Regents preparation to assist students with credit accumulation All Students December 2018-May 2019 Develop a comprehensive plan for parent outreach using the parent allotted engagement time, which includes consistent use of school messenger in advance of PA and SLT meetings, guidance counselors informing parents of PA and SLT meetings, mailings that include PA and SLT info, and PA access to school events. All Families September 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement AP, Guidance and Organization Grade Team Leaders Grade teams School counselors AP Guidance and Organziation Parent Coordinator AP Guidance and Organization Principal If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. The Evander Beacon, Epic Theatre Ensemble, Community Word Project, Epic, DC-TV, Open Door Arts in Education, The Leadership Program Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per session for Supervisor School Aide, School Aides, Teachers and Counselors to assist with parents and students with Skedula usage. CUNY Technology student to update our website to include the Skedula link and directions for usage of Skedula and assist other students with using Skedula. Grade teams need refreshments and materials for parent meetings using set-aside Priority funds in the amount We would also like to host an over-night college trip with parent chaperones. using set-aside Priority funds. Increased funding for postage, paper and ink for enhanced newsletters Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Monthly Skedula usage Report Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Skedula data will be used to monitor the usage by parents three times a year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 36  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. 60% of the students who are over-aged and under-credited, identified as ELL and , students with a disability will participate in our Achieve Now Academy and earn 11 credits by June 2019. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. We use incentives like trips provided through the program, as well as the design of programs of interest like theatre, dance and band to boost participation. We use school messenger, personal meetings and phone calls to inform parents. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. We have developed an academic tutoring, school counseling, and enrichment program that consists of visual and performing arts, career and technical education in theatre and film , academic tutoring, and counseling to support students at risk for failure with additional supports at the end of the school day three days a week. Any core subject in the program is taught by a NYS certified teacher in the content area. We consistently make personal phone calls, send letters and host individualized meetings to involve and engage families. 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 2. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement. The assistant principal works with the guidance counselors and deans, while the principal works with the school partners and the teachers to run the program. The community partners work with the classroom teachers to run extra curricular programs on different days of the week for the target population. We monitor credit accumulation and attendance to assess the impact on student achievement. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. We plan to start October 15 and end May 24. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. We will use Title I funding and funds from the Achieve Now academy grant. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of term 2, 60% of students in the ELT will earn 7+ credits. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will review scholarship reports using STARS data . Review students report cards Review students transcripts Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Average below 75 Under-credited Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Individualized goal work based on interim assessments aligned to standards Small group and tutoring When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, After school and Saturday No attempt, not passed, or below 80 on Regents Mathematics Average below 75 Under-credited Individualized goal work based on interim assessments aligned to standards Small group and tutoring During the school day, After school and Saturday No attempt, not passed, or below 80 on Regents Science Average below 75 Under-credited Individualized goal work based on interim assessments aligned to standards Small group and tutoring During the school day, After school and Saturday No attempt, not passed, or below 80 on Regents Social Studies Average below 75 Under-credited Individualized goal work based on interim assessments aligned to standards Small group and tutoring During the school day, After school and Saturday No attempt, not passed, or below 80 on Regents Average below 75 Under-credited At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Individualized goal work based on RISE curriculum using by the Leaedrship Groupa and social and emotional goals Small group and 1:1 counseling During the school day, After school and Saturday 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  from IEP’s from the counselors servicing students in the Achieve now Academy No attempt or not passed on Regents Repeated OORs incidents Attendance below 80% or chronically absent Academic and social emotional 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 27 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We offer tutoring for academic support and additional counseling for social and emotional support. Additionally, we offer a boys and girls group for the students. Finally, we secure school supplies and uniforms. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 2018-19 SCEP-P 42  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Consultants from Innovative Designs in Education (IDE), Generation Ready or a Teacher Development Coach provide sustained professional learning throughout the year for all staff. The administrators attend the Executive Leadership Institute sponsored by the CSA, the Superintendent and receive coaching from a leadership coach from the NYC Leadership Academy. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. The professional learning committee meets monthly to review the professional development offered in support of the use of assessments. Teachers in the grade level meet weekly to discuss the assessments use and the data garnered from the assessments. Department teams set their own agendas and meet bi-monthly. An ambassador from the professional learning committee sits at both the grade and department level and serves as a conduit to relay decisions to and from all meetings. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 235,217.00 $11,134 $38,843 0 0 $4,035 2,268,924.00 x x x x x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) sect 6 section 5, section 6 section 6 section 5, section 6 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 SCEP-P 45   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts Parent and Family Engagement Policy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The BHSWCA Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts will support parents and families of Title I students by: 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts School-Parent Compact (SPC) School Parent Compact Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA);; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 4 1 3 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Bronx High School for Writing and Communication Arts has targeted the performance of ELLs and former ELLs in all content areas, but especially in ELA. We have found that ensuring that our ELL's pass the ELA Regents is our greatest focus as we still have 24 out of 38 ELL students who need to pass the ELA Regents exam and 9 of the students are juniors and senior students. We have concluded that intensive supplementary instruction in various aspects of the ELA Regents, as well as more intensive and targeted, individualized instruction in formal , academic and content specific vocabulary and structure in Social Studies would be most beneficial to all current and former ELLs. A large number of our ELLs, especially the long-term ELLs and recent former ELLs, still wrestle with the finer aspects of the language, like syntax and diction. To that end BHSWCA has engaged Community Word Project (CWP), a community-based arts and literary organization to work with our highly qualified faculty to create an engaging after school literary, theater and arts program to supplement the exhaustive instruction provided each day. CWP pushes into four classes of ELL students during the day to provide push in support and to reduce class size. We have also initiated extensive after school workshops and tutoring in content areas and specifically targeted to ELLs and former ELLs in our school. The subgroups we will be targeting are ELLs and former ELLs still eligible for services. All grades 9-12 will be involved. The after school program with Community Word Project will run for 10 weeks from the beginning of January through the middle of March. Hours will be 3 p.m. to 4 p.m two days a week Tuesdays and Thursdays. After school tutoring and workshops will take place twice weekly from 3 p.m. to 4 p.m. from October through January and April through June. A qualified and licensed ESL teacher and a bilingual special education teacher, will work in collaboration with two content area teachers and the teaching artisits from Community Word project after school to provide direct service to students. The bilingual special eduation teacher and the ESl teacher will also be be involved in all aspects of curriculum creation and assessment, to ensure that all materials for ELLs and former ELLs are instructionally appropriate, differentiated and student-centered. CWP will be partially paid for with Title III funds, as per SAM #31 Guidelines. The language of instruction will be English. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Materials used for these programs are the art supplies and writing materials necessary for the after school arts program, which will produce a mural, and a film project. . Books and textbooks, excluding mandated texts, for the after school tutoring and workshops. Title III Immigrant funds will be used to buy material for existing program. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: On-going professional development for all teachers and administrators is a necessary component of what we do here at BHSWCA. Keeping abreast of new developments as well as periodically refreshing our understanding and strengthening our skills with regard to our ELL population is of paramount importance. Professional development will be provided for all faculty in the following manner. Teaching artists from Community Word will meet with the ESL teacher, one Social Studies teacher, and the bilingual special education teacher for 10 weeks from November 1st through the end of January with the ESL teacher. The professional learning work will emphasize how best to work within the content areas to boost literacy and critical thinking skills in current and former ELLs and second language students through the use of the arts, specifically using theater, visual art poetry to engage the students. The time period for this professional development will 3-4 pm or lunch times for working lunches depending on availability of teachers, every Thursday for 10 weeks. This professional development is in addition to the direct instruction that Community Word Project provides. Title III monies will be used to partially pay for the professional services of Community Word Project (20% maximum as per SAM #31 Guidelines) and to provide compensation for teachers in the form of per session. No Title III funds will be used be used for the below: Our certified ESL teacher, our Assistant Principal, Supervision and our Principal Resident and Principal will all take part in professional development workshops and conferences as permitted by schedule. We are all committing to attend at least 15 hours of PD a semester given by providers such as the NYCDOE. The ESL teacher, the AP and the Principal will then use what they have learned to provide professional development for staff and faculty at BHSWCA. ESL teachers will give presentations on topics including but not limited to, differentiation, vocabulary building, scaffolding for ELLs, cultural awareness, the use of graphic organizers for ELLs and how to use data to drive instruction for ELL students. These presentations will take place during regularly scheduled staff meetings (Fridays, 2:00 pm to 3:00 pm) throughout the school year. 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  Part C: Professional Development There will be no less than four and up to seven of these per year to ensure all teachers are given repeated opportunities to engage with the ESL teacher and the bilingual special education teacher, guidance counselor and paraprofessional regarding strategies and resources for ELLs. Furthermore, the ESL teacher, bilingual special education teacher, counselor and paraprofessional will take part regularly in cohort meetings, department meetings and inquiry team meetings (two to three times a week, one academic period a day) in order to apprise content area teachers of ELLs difficulties and progress and to review and revise curriculum, develop strategies and methodologies to improve reading comprehension, vocabulary, oral skills, and test-taking skill in preparation of Regents examinations as well as to meet the learning needs of all students. Collaborative team topics are based on the most current NYSESLAT results. All teachers are involved in facilitating differentiated learning and building skill, reading, writing, and speaking capacity. As part of our school’s routine, all content area teachers share practices with each other. Also, the ENL teacher attends monthly ENL Liaison meetings and shares the strategies he/she learns there in regular meetings with grade teams. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Involvement Program: Parental involvement can be key to a student's success. At BHSWCA we strive to keep all of our parents engaged and informed throughout the school year. For parents of ELLs this is especially important as language, cultural and other barriers may cause the parents difficulty in becoming involved and staying informed of their child's progress. In order to better facilitate greater parental involvement for our ELL students, BHSWCA makes it a point to be a welcoming, inclusive school where all parents, no matter what language they speak, feel comfortable. We provide workshops (three times a year, two hours per workshop from 5 -6 p.m. to better facilitate attendance) for parents, on graduation requirements, credit accumulation, and the importance of Regents exams and the NYSESLAT. Title III monies will be used to pay for non-mandated materials as well as refreshments and in the form of per session for the ESL teacher to lead and facilitate these workshops. Calendar dates are: March 4th: Graduation requirements, credit accumulation and college requirements March 25th: Regents review April 11 NYSESLAT prep Parents are kept informed of their child’s progress through frequent communication with the ESL Coordinator and their ESL teacher. As per Chancellor’s Regulations, translation services are provided when appropriate and our bilingual parent coordinator, special education teacher, counselor and paraprofessional , as well as our ENL teacher, in addition to several other bilingual staff are able to provide translation services. We routinely inform parents of their child’s progress in their regular classes as well as any after school programs, as well as update parents on ELL related matters in the form of our newsletter. We refer to the Translation and Interpretation Unit regarding translation services. Invitations to and notification of school events, 2018-19 SCEP-P 56 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities meetings and field trips are sent to parents in English and in the parents’ preferred language. Following the notifications, an appropriate staff member contacts parents individually to remind them of upcoming events. All notifications in translated versions are posted outside the parent engagement office in 218. In addition to participating in all school events, parents of ELLs are invited to join their children on field trips to various cultural institutions. Twenty parents of ELLs are invited to participate. Admissions and refreshments for parents will be funded through Title III monies. We also provide English language learning to our parents using Title III monies in our Parent Engagement Center in room 218, led by our ESL teacher and our Parent President. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-P 57  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Bronx High School for Writing and Commun Borough Bronx School Number 253 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Terri Grey Coach Cynthia Taylor/ Science ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Thomas Hughes Teacher/Subject Area Shawneequa Greene/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Meline Elleston/ SS Related-Service Provider Vlad Grullon Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Renel Piton Coach Alma Labrador/ Math School Counselor Joseph Williams Jr. Parent Antaya Williams Parent Coordinator Bahiyyah Jones/ Spanish Field Support Center Staff Member Richard Petrone Other (Name and Title) Jenel Bethea ,Special Educatio C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 338 Total number of ELLs 53 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.68% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? For newcomer and students with interrupted formal education we us a variety of methods to assess their early literary skills. We use NYSITELL results as well as baseline assessments, both formal and informal. We have instituted the use of Fall and Spring benchmark assessments for all ELLs. We also use Read Theory to establish reading and comprehension lexile and grade levels. We will also use I-Ready to assess literacy. Jenel Bethea, the Special Education Coordinator assesses SWD for literacy levels. By and large the data shows that our ELLs read and write at about a 2 nd to 5 th grade level which shows a need for intensive work on all aspects of literacy. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2018-19 SCEP-P 59  Structures we have in place to support the effort to use formative assesment to guide instructional planning for our ELLs are regular co-planning meetings and well as cohort and department meetings to discuss and evaluate ELL assessment data and use the date to guide our curricular planning. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our program is assessed through NYSESLAT scores and Regents results, as well as credit accumulation for ELLs, and passing rates. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We modify instruction with appropriate scaffolding and differentiation i order to address interventions indicated by summative data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] As per the RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs, "INTENSTIVE, TARGETED INTERVENTION is provided to support ELLs who are not showing sufficient progress on the skills and/or competencies measured." Our school has mandated tutoring for all at-risk students, including our ELL population. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We usethe EDAT and the RLAT report from ATS as well as Regents and formal and informal classroom assessment to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We make use of co-planning time as well as cohort, and department meetings and faculty meetings led by the ENL department to disseminate the findings from assessments and adjust, as needed, our programs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All our ENL class structures are planned and populated according to Cr Part 154 using data from the edat and Rlat to assure the mandated minutes are afforded every Ell and eligible former Ell. The stand alone classes are taught in English. They are heterogeneous and mixed grade. Integrated classes are programmed using STARS and EDUR to ensure compliance and the the best outcomes for our students. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students are given the required stand alone and integrated units as per CR Part 154. The school ensures this by using STARS and the RLAT report on ATS to determine by NYSESLAT scores and level of each student, giving each student the appropriate number of units of instruction. In all cases, ENL students at our school are given more than the required minimum number of units for every proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English with a licensed ENL Teacher. ENL Teacher provides support in the form of scaffolding, graphic organizers, etc. The ENL teacher is a co-teacher, working with the content teacher to provide instruction to all students with an emphasis on English language acquisition. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages by qualified staff members fluent in the student's language or through the use of the DoE Translation and Interpretation Unit. We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native language by using the data from the Spanish LAB-R. In addition, ELLs have the option of testing in their native language in class assessments as well as on state assessments. The rationale behind this approach is that research indicates that proficiency in literacy and higher order thinking skills in the native language will support and transfer with efficiency in the second language acquisition process. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6a. The instructional plan for SIFE students includes grouping based on skill level to facilitate and target instruction as well as ongoing assessments to further inform instruction and define the needs of each student. During the school day, SIFE students, when not in their ENL class are supported through regular contact with their ENL teacher and differentiated instruction by their content teachers based on communication with ENL teacher. Students work in both homogeneous and heterogeneous groups based on skill levels in order to ensure the comprehension of basic concepts and strategies while at the same time allowing for and encouraging the SIFE student to participate in discussions with peers in small groups and the class as a whole. In the ENL classes specifically, instructors use a combination of explicit instruction in vocabulary and basic concepts as well as hands-on projects and modeling to facilitate comprehension. Questioning to activate higher order thinking as well as diagrams, sorts and charts to enable the SIFE student to become comfortable participating in group activities as well as with the entire class are used extensively. Beginning SIFE students with little or no English are paired with bilingual students to facilitate comprehension and are paired with a bilingual paraprofessional. Written responses may be done, initially, in the student's native language. When possible, native language literacy will be assessed in order to ascertain probable levels of positive transference. Regular assessment is used to evaluate student progress and tailor instruction. Beginners are also afforded all the material support we can give them. This includes dictionaries, study books, mandated extra time on exams and tests and one-to-one instruction. 6b. ELLs in U.S. schools less than three years are handled very similarly to SIFE students initially. After a preliminary assessment to, if possible, ascertain literacy levels in both the students native language and their skill level in English, as well as investigating their previous educational history, beginners are grouped both homogeneously as well as heterogeneously to facilitate basic comprehension and skills as well as communication and interaction with a variety of students at different levels. Various instructional strategies include the use of realia, modeling, physical response, using bilingual peers as language and literacy supports, supporting 2nd language acquisition by allowing students to write in first language and then attempting to translate or explain with gestures, one word answers and illustrations. There is also explicit instruction of vocabulary and basic strategies and techniques for the formation of both oral and written communication. Speaking and listening are emphasised at 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  this point through strategies such as Total Physical Response, nodding and gestures. Due to the requirements of NCLB, our students are introduced to the Regents Exam immediately. Through intensive scaffolding and sheltered instruction, the students are encouraged to begin thinking in the terms demanded by the Regents Exams. While we do not teach "to the test," we do use a variety of context-rich readings and authentic discourse tailored to the levels of our students along with strategies for activating prior knowledge and schema that will allow them to, at the very least, not be intimidated by the idea of taking such a high-stakes test, and, in the best cases, do well on them. At BHSWCA, we are intent on making our ELLs feel comfortable and at ease as they acquire and strengthen their new language at all levels. Taking the ELA Regents is only one part of that process. For beginner students coming to us in the 11 th grade, this can be a daunting task. Our goal in such cases is always to strive to give the student the skills and the tools they need to take the test, as well as an understanding of the achievement it is simply to sit for a test like the ELA Regents as a newcomer in a foreign country, speaking a strange language. Also, ELLs are afforded the extra time mandated on all state tests as well as exams and tests such as finals given in the individual classes. 6c. ELLs who have received between 4 and 6 years of instruction in English are offered the same kind of assessment-informed targeted instruction as newcomers, but at a more complex level. While encouraging them at all times to maintain and honor their first language, these students are expected to do the majority of their work in English. Grouping at this point becomes more heterogeneous, again, based on a constant, but not overwhelming cycle of assessment, instruction, re-assessment, and academic skills such as note-taking, the acquisition of academic language and skills and the solicitation by the instructor of opinions, points-of-view and clear, English language explanations from the students which are a regular part of classroom instruction. Students at this level who have not passed the ELA Regents are regularly tutored in regents review. In order to avoid the "plateauing" of skill levels so often seen among this sub-group, our school is in the process of forming an ENL Inquiry Team in order to examine students' progress and make recommendations for instructional strategy change and differentiation 6d. ELLs with 6 years or more of instruction behind them are given all the support and opportunity of the ELLs with fewer years of instruction if they require it. At this point, hopefully, the student is able to function well in their content area classes with minimum intervention. Various supports are available to them on an ongoing basis. Materials such as dual language dictionaries and access to the ENL instructor are always available through class or on an informal, one-to-one basis. These students are also given the required extra time for testing and exams 6e. For former ELLs, those ELLs who have tested proficient, we offer tutoring, both one on one and small group as well as all the mandated supports, e.g. extra time on exams, etc. In regular consultation with the ENL Teacher, the progress of the former ELL is monitored to ensure that they have all the support they need in their core curriculum classes. Students reaching proficiency on the NYSELAT are given the same time extensions and supports, e.g. dictionaries, translators, etc, they were afforded before passing the test, for up to two years after reaching proficiency. More than that, we continue to support our ELL community in every way we can up to the day they graduate. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For ELLs requiring special needs, the same kind of assessment based, targeted instruction applies. For this sub-group however, this would all be done in consultation with instructors who specialize in special needs students and according to the parameters of the student's IEP. The ENL, Special Education, and content area teachers collaborate in weekly inquiry, grade and department meetings to discuss and share students' progress in order to ensure that each SWD-ELL is afforded instruction appropriate to his/her language and learning needs. Our school makes every effort to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. The certified ENL teacher collaborates weekly with the Special Education Team, and Grade Inquiry Team to monitor individual ELL-SWD's progress in core subject classes and by grade. The use a number of strategies to address the needs of ELL-SWDs to provide content access and language acquisition. The include pull-out small group classes, extensive use of various scaffolding strategies such as bridging, text representation, schema building and modeling. We also use technology programs such as I-ready and Read Theory which allow students to go at their own pace with the teacher as a facilitator. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  We offer small group instruction, integrated collaborative team teaching classes, academic intervention services, and speech and counseling. Furthermore, Expanding ELLs are placed in ICT English classes along with ENL classes until they pass the NYSESLAT. Throughout curricula, amplified text along with guided notes are used to ensure content comprehension. After-school tutoring is also given to serve as extra time to complete tasks and assessments. All ELLs are grouped heterogeneously to facilitate access to the general education curriculum. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs across all content areas including ELA, math, social studies and science include one-to-one instruction, small group tutoring and instruction, targeted and data driven inquiry strategy programs and plans. These intervention programs are offered for all subgroups with emphasis on beginners and intermediates. The language in which these services are offered is English. Native language support is provided in all content area classes through the use of Google translate, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Epic Theatre Ensemble and Community Word Project, an arts partner organization with the school, will be initiating a targeted program to work with the ELLs. We will be initiating an academic vocabulary program across all content areas as well as programs using rhetorical templates to increase the academic writing level of our ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs during and after the regular school day. ELLs are encouraged to attend enrichment, athletic and general school activities and are made aware of programs via translated material if necessary, open and targeted invitation and highly visible announcements in various languages when necessary. Programs include: Title III after school tutoring, Regents NYSESLAT preparation classes, all campus PSAL sports teams, college trips and SAT preparatory classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ELLs are supported across the content areas with materials such as dual language textbooks, dictionaries and glossaries, access to technology (selected bilingual websites, smartboard use and laptop and ipad access). All teachers of ELLs are aware of the ELL students in their classrooms and use both ARIS and Skedula to ascertain their levels and better understand their needs as ELLs. All teachers of ELLs are in regular consultation with the ENL teacher to discuss strategies for scaffolding and differentiation. The school utilizes a number of computer based programs such as Rosetta Stone, Read Theory, and Achieve 3000 to support all students but especially newcomers and Sife students. As of last year, all of our students have Ipads in the classroom. Most of our instruction is becoming technology based and this allows instant access to dictionaries and translations. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELLs are supported across the content areas with materials such as dual language textbooks, dictionaries and glossaries, access to technology (selected bilingual websites, smartboard use and laptop access). 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Required services and support correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. Support services are aligned to appropriate age and grade level through grade-team meetings in order to ensure Common Core Learning Standards alignment, curriculum 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  alignment and grade-band (age) appropriateness. Sophomores and Juniors who are preparing to take the Regents are provided additional support in the appropriate content areas. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? NA 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students participate in a summer orientation where baseline testing is conducted. Students are placed in advisory and given additional support. Transitioning ELLs coming from middle to high school are afforded the opportunity to come to an orientation session with their parents before the beginning of the school year. This is in addition to the required orientation sessions for all incoming ELLs 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish is offered to all students, including ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL personnel includes subject area teachers, school aides, parent coordinators, school counselors and secretaries. staff regularly attends professional development sponsored by such groups as the Bilingual Education Technical Assistance Center (Betac.) and training offered by OELL. Personnel are regularly apprised of professional development opportunities by the administration and, in consultation with the administration, attend either these or others that they themselves have found out about and think will be most helpful. ESL teachers participate in various school inquiry teams to support content area teachers' instruction of ELLs and discuss students' progress. Personnel receiving training include: Assistant Principals, ENL/Bilingual teachers, subject area teachers, Special Education teachers, Guidance Counselors, Secretaries, Paraprofessionals, Parent Coordinators. ENL teacher will be leading PDs for whole staff including counselors and office staff three times during the year. Various workshops and specialized PD geared specifically to support ELLs as they engage the CCLS are offered throughout the school year at Fordham University, as well as various workshops, trainings and various PD opportunities provided by the DoE and open to all teachers. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  All staff participate regularly in professional development that includes discussion of topics of concern to ELLs and their families. Documentation of ENL training (workshop certificates, agendas, attendance) for all staff is maintained in the school file by the school secretary. Attendance sheet, as well as certificates of attendance and other documents of validity of PD conformity and authenticity are updated on a regular basis for all teachers. Agendas are kept and catalogued, as well as being marked on school academic calendars. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teacher meets with parents of ELLs to discuss NYSESLAT scores and proficiciency levels.The ENL teacher regularly evaluates progress with the content teachers using Skedula as well as an official call list to notify parents of annual meetings to discuss progress. These meetings are not included in the mandated meetings. Provisions for translations and interpretation are provided by the Language Access Coordinator through the use of the Doe translation and interpretation or through other means where applicable as in paid vendors or teacher able to translate and interpret. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents, including the parents of ELLs, are involved in the school in a number of ways apart from the regular open school nights. A parent sits on the School Leadership Team. There is regular communication by telephone between ELL parents and instructors. All ELL parents are invited to our school's many functions. Parents support the school through participation in the PTA and other informal organizations. Also, our Parent Coordinator is bilingual and able to reach out without a translator to all of our Spanish-speaking parents. For low incidence language translations, we contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit for phone or on-site translation support. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our parental involvement activities address the needs of parents by making parents feel both welcome and informed. As a school, we strive to be part of a larger community, and enlisting the support of parents by making sure they feel welcome, comfortable and a necessary part of their child's education. Our school’s activities and ELL parent meeting topics include: Skedula training, parent English language clinics, credit accumulation, NYS content standards, NYS Common Core Learning Standards, state assessments, core curriculum, native language support in the classroom, graduation requirements, credit accumulation, college applications process and general expectations for students. 2018-19 SCEP-P 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Terri Lynn Grey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx High School for Writing School DBN: 11x253 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Terri Grey Renel Piton Title Principal Assistant Principal Marcia Martinez Parent Coordinator Thomas Hughes ENL/Bilingual Teacher Antaya Williams Parent Meline Elleston/SS Teacher/Subject Area Shawneequa Greene/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Joseph Williams Jr. School Counselor Carron Staple Richard Petrone Jenel Bethea Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Special Education Lead Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x253 School Name: BHSWCA Superintendent: Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No PARENT YES COORDINATOR ENL Coordinator/teacher yes 4/20/17 NO yes DEBORAH AGOSTO Thomas Hughes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication are derived by an examination of pt. 3 of the Home Language Identification Survey and the use of the parent preferred language report as well as emergency contact cards, interviews and surveys. Most importantly, we survey the parents at various times throughout the year including but not limited to curriculum night and parent teacher conferences which language they would most prefer for communication with the school and then, using the Department of Education's Translation & Interpretation Unit if a staff member does not speak or understand the language, we honor their wishes. We also maintain a report that updates languages parents speak. This regularly-updated 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  report will be organized by class and grade to better facilitate timely action in terms of appropriate language and translation services. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese French Fulani Ga Jamaican/Creole English Spanish Urdu Wolof Sukuma Data as of 9/28/18 1 5 3 3 1 2 1 1 362 112 1 2 1 na 0.2 1.01 0.61 0.61 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.2 73.13 22.63 0.2 0.4 0.2 na 1 4 3 3 1 2 1 2 362 112 1 2 1 na 0.2 0.81 o.61 0.61 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.4 73.13 22.63 0.2 0.4 0.2 na 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA as of 9/28/18 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Handbooks Sept. 15/on enrollment as needed for OTC students How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. BHSWCA will use the Big Word (Doe vendor) to translate student and parent documents as needed. We will ensure timely provision of documents by 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  Conference announcements A week prior to conferences Principal letters/newsletters Monthly After school programming Ongoing/program dependent Student specific letters Ongoing/as needed Testing dates/testing At least a week prior to all testing dates having documents translated into the nine doe covered languages, on hand at all times. We will use data from ATS and HLIS (Home Language Survey) to get translations of other languages as needed as quickly as possible and within 10 days of admittance. BHSWCA will use NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation templates/resources as necessary and available. Otherwise we will use the Big Word for translation services. We will ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents in preferred language other than English by printing and maintaining a file of pre-printed documents in covered languages and examining ats (rcpl, redl) These are computer reports within the school system that contain information regarding parent preferred languages. BHSWCA will use the Big Word (Doe vendor) to translate student and parent documents as needed. We will ensure timely provision of documents by having documents translated into the covered languages on hand at all times. We will use data from ATS and HLIS to provide translations of other languages as needed as quickly as possible and within 10 days of admittance. As necessary interpretation and translation unit and/or staff/Google translate then checked by staff for lotes represented by the school staff. BHSWCA will use T&I intranet templates where applicable and necessary and otherwise will use doe vendor (The Big Word) to translate. Our school will use the DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit for translation of this document into 9 covered languages. For non-covered languages we will use our language access budget to request translation from the Big Word. BHSWCA will keep a file of pre-written notices in the nine covered languages. We will will consult on a regular basis in terms of the yearly calendar to make sure that any language not included in the covered 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  languages is provided at least ten days prior to distribution of information. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Mandated parent teacher meetings Nov., March, May Curriculum Night Sept iep meetings ongoing/at least 2 weeks prior to meeting Regular Outreach daily/Weekly/monthly Mandated ELL meeting Ongoing throughout the year provide interpretation service(s)? BHSWCA will use OPI where needed and/or staff interpreters. Interpretation services are prepared either in-house or through a DOE vendor in a timely manner preceding any face to face or over-the-phone contact with parents who speak language other than English. Interpretation services are provided either in-house with staff who speak covered languages or through DOE vendor for interpretation as necessary. BHSWCA will provide translation and interpretation through the T&I unit as necessary. Staff with appropriate skill in the necessary language will also be involved in translation where applicable. Interpretation services are provided either in-house or through DOE vendor or OPI (Over the Phone) Either in-house or through DOE vendor or with OPI. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, BHSWCA will use OTPI for parents who prefer language other than English. All staff have access to language line and have been trained in its use. K-12 Alerts and staff will communicate through texts, email with English and Spanish speaking parents and and phone message in preferred lote via otpi. Staff are familiar with preferred lo of parents of students in their classes and are encouraged to keep a file listing such. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. BHSWCA will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 through regular PD, grade level and cohort meetings as well as distribution of material (Pamphlets, translation line number, etc.) All staff are provided with brochures and pamphlets regarding the use of the OPI and the T&I unit. A copy of CR A-663 will be provided to all staff at the beginning of the year. Language Access Coordinator will provide a training mid-year as well. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will fulfill the requirements as set forth in section VII of the Chancellor's Regulation in the following manner: All notifications will be set forth in the manner described and in the designated areas within the prescribed time frames as noted in the regulations. We have posted the poster around the school and the building and distributed the brochures, flyers and letters to parents at curriculum night and on a continuous basis at every opportunity. There is a poster in the welcome center and in the main office of our school and brochures are available at the front desk and all teachers have the brochure as well the instructions and numbers for OPI. Also during the mandated ELL parent conferences parents are made aware of the available options for communication and provided with brochures, flyers and letters in preferred lotes. Qualified staff will interpret in applicable languages during PTA, SLT, PTC and all relevant meetings. Chancellor's backpacked items are sent in specific lote. As a regular practice, the schools sends out bilingual and multi-lingual. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school will gather feedback from parents through Skedula, face to face annual meetings and parent surveys distributed during but not limited to parent teacher conferences, curriculum night and regular (Back to school). We will also survey staff and parents using translated survey templates as well as surveys translated through the LTI for non-covered languages as needed. We implement feedback from parents to improve outreach in preferred lote through the use of a database we will construct based upon the feedback we receive. 2018-19 SCEP-P 72 
