 11X265 School Name: BRONX LAB SCHOOL Principal: SARAH MARCY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 11X265 Bronx Lab School 32110001126 9-12 800 East Gun Hill Road, Bronx, NY 10467 718-696-3700 Phone Number: 718-696-3730 Fax: Sarah Marcy smarcy@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Sarah Marcy Jacob Prairie Maria Carrasco Sarah Marcy Gisela Najero AaliyahCortez DominackRobinson Maya Doyle District Information Kathy Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 KRehfield@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 923-5181 Phone Number: (718) 923-5145. Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Group Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 AAnorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718 - 935 - 5941 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Sarah Marcy Jacob Prairie Maria Carrasco BasildaVazquez Gisela Najero AaliyahCortez DominackRobinson Maya Doyle Stacy Rogers Esmeralda Ramos Rudolf John *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Teacher PTA Secretary PTAMember   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ann Marie Mack PTAMember Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? To prepare for college and life, Bronx Lab School students engage in meaningful and contextual academic work, participate in a nurturing community, explore their passions, and learn to value effort as a means to success.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. BLS is a part of the NY Performance Standards Consortium, an elite group of NYC schools that believe that learning cannot be sufficiently demonstrated within the confines of standardized tests. This means students spend time doing and presenting original, college-level work. The curriculum and Gateway projects teach our students to be critical thinkers, writers, and problem-solvers. Bronx Lab’s teachers make sure that every child is engaged in inquiry and student-centered classrooms. Our teachers expect students to think deeply, ask big questions and explore to find the answers. All students are learning to communicate their ideas in writing and aloud by presenting their new understandings and findings. All of this learning is framed by our Bronx Lab Habits of Mind: Analyzing Evidence, Multiple Viewpoints, Intellectual Curiosity, Taking Creative Risks, and Metacognition. In collaboration with our CBO, MMCC, Bronx Lab is committed to giving our students enrichment experiences outside the classroom. All students have the opportunity to attend college trips and 11th and 12th graders have the chance to take College Now courses for college credit. Seniors also have the chance to participate in a full-time Internship during Spring semester. Bronx Lab offers swimming, biking, theatre, music, tech, skateboard building, activist groups, and more during after school extra-curricular. Every student builds relationships within our community during our fall and spring Advisory Days, and our 3-day Explore Week service learning experience in April. Additionally, 9th grade student are mentored by a pair of trained Junior and Senior students through Peer Group Connection (PGC). 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 400 students 28% SWDs 14% ELLs 13% STH 100% Title 1 Campus 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During 2017-2018, Bronx Lab School made strong progress in "Supportive Environment" and “Strong Family Ties.” In the 2018 Learning Environment Survey data, our scores in the "supportive environment" category improved in 5 out of 6 areas, including classroom behavior, peer support for academic work, personal attention and support, safety, and social-emotional. Additionally, we met our "supportive environment" goal of all advisory teams conducting advisory classes in Circle. In the 2018 Survey data, our score in the "strong family ties" category increased significantly from 2.75 to 3.45, in part to implementing our new Family Outreach system through advisory teams. As we continue to build on these efforts, our key focuses in 2018-2019 will also include the framework elements of "Effective School Leadership," "Rigorous Instruction," and “Collaborative Teachers.” We will continue to track school-wide data around course pass rates toward our goal of at least 75% pass rates. We are also continuing our work in Mastery-Based Grading, focusing on (re)defining course standards under the umbrella of department standards. Additionally, teacher Professional Learning Groups will be directly tied to further developing non-scripted inquiry curriculum and instruction. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X265 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 399 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 10 12 4 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 50 49 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 84.0% % Attendance Rate 82.7% % Reduced Lunch 14.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.5% 59.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.1 0% 12% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 67% 1% 54.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 117 116 78.1% 0.5% 27.1% 33.6% 1.8% 2.5% 4 21% 5.4 N/A N/A 20% 1% 87.7% 8% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: 2.2 Curriculum aligned assessment practices, particularly the use of rubrics, and rubric-based feedback are used across classrooms. Teachers consistently monitor PBAT and Gateway Assessment data to determine student progress across grades and subject areas. This has led to actionable, skills-based feedback regarding student achievement is provided to both teachers and students, allowing for curricular and instructional adjustments. 1.2: Teaching practices are aligned to the curricula and reflect an articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best that is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work. (2017-2018 Central-Led Review Report for Focus Schools) 1.1 Faculty ensures that all curricula are aligned to varying combinations of New York Performance Standards,Consortium performance assessment rubrics, the Common Core Learning Standards, and the Habits of Mind: Analyzing Evidence, Multiple Viewpoints, Taking Creative Risks, Intellectual Curiosity, and Meta cognition. Needs: 2.2: Review school’s grading policies and consider moving toward a more standards mastery-based grading and reporting system. Incorporate professional development around effective grading policies and effective assessment and feedback practices. (2017-2018 Central-Led Review Report for Focus Schools). Last year, student course pass rates fluctuated across marking periods starting out at a 74% average across the school in the first marking period and ending in a 68.6% average across the school in the final marking period. This resulted in a 62.6% graduation rate. In the prior two years our graduation rate was 68% and 83%. 1.2: Across classrooms, instruction does not consistently provide students with effective entry points into the curricula or the structures needed to engage in meaningful discussions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 2  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of teachers will (re)define their course standards under the umbrella of department standards and link the assignments and assessments to course standards in JumpRope (our online standards-based grade book).." 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All teachers will work with department teams to (re)define skill and content standards that students will master in their course. These standards will vertically align from 12th grade down to 9th grade, all building toward graduation PBAT projects. Teachers will enter their updated standards along with gateway projects and assessments into JumpRope (our online standards-based grade book). Departments will use LASW protocols to norm around what makes a strong and well-written standard. Teachers will revise skill and content standards mid-year as needed. Teachers will work together, with the support of the Learning Support and ESL departments, to ensure that skill and content standards are scaffolded and differentiated in order to meet the learning needs of all students, especially SWDs and ELLs. During parent-teacher conferences, student-led conferences, Roundtable and PBAT presentations, parents will be involved in assessing their student’s growth in regards to the skills and content standards laid out for each course. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Department teams (all teachers) Fall semester, completed by Feb. 1 Department Chair Leaders Department teams 2018-2019 school year Department Chair Leaders All teachers All year All Teachers Parents and students All year All Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to attend student Round Tables and Panels during Regent’s week to be involved in assessing their student’s growth in regards to the skills and content standards laid out for each course. Parents will be contacted via phone or email at least once a month to get updates on their student's progress in class and upcoming class events. These actions will be implemented by both the classroom teacher and the advisers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  Human Resources: Department chairs, grade team leaders, lead teachers Instructional Resources: Understanding by Design framework, Consortium Rubrics, PBAT materials from Consortium schools Schedule Adjustments: Regents weeks will be used to hold panels Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 80% of teachers will create learning standards, link standards to assignments, and assess assignments according to learning standards, as evidenced by teachers’ Jumprope online standards-based grade books. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Department Chairs will confirm that learning standards have been entered into JumpRope (our online standards-based grade book). Mastery Based Grading Rubrics used in all assignments for all grades Consortium Rubrics used in all PBAT courses. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: 3.4: School leaders consistently communicate high expectations (professionalism, instruction, communication, and other elements of the Danielson Framework for Teaching) to the entire staff and provide training. 3.4: School leaders and staff communicate expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness and successfully partner with families to support student progress towards those expectations. 3.4: Teacher teams and staff establish a culture for learning that systematically communicates a unified set of high expectations for all students and provide clear, focused, and effective feedback and guidance/advisement supports to ensure that students, including high need subgroups, own their educational experience and are prepared for the next level. Needs: Developing on Indicator 1.4 on 2016-2017 QR Structures for a positive learning environment, inclusive culture, and student success a) Safe and inclusive school culture b) School coordinates social emotional learning, attendance, and youth development for academic success c) Aligned professional development and supports for adoption of effective academic and 6  School Environment Survey 2017-2018: Only 64% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the adults at their school teach students the skills they need to regulate their behavior and only 45% of students responded that, in most or all of their classes, their teachers support them when they are upset. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of advisors will have conducted a minimum of 4 student-led advisory classes in Circle. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Use Restorative Justice practices, such as Circles, in all Advisories and these practices will be interspersed throughout classes. These practices especially target and support SWDs and ELLs as they are designed to engage all students based on their current levels and needs. All Students, including SWDs and ELLs 2018-2019 school year Restorative Justice(RJ) Coordinator Advisory teams will meet weekly to refine advisory vertical plans that address content standards and four competencies of advisory: BLS 5, Community Building, Social-Emotional Learning, Restorative Justice, Academic Support and college and career readiness. Advisors will work with students to develop circle practices and give students leadership roles within circle. Advisors will reach out to families regularly to share progress toward these goals and engage them in support students practice BLS5 values at home as well. Peer Group Connections, led by 11th grade peer mentors will work with 9th grade advisories weekly incorporating BLS 5, Social-Emotional Learning, Community-building and circle practice Peer Mediation, a class designed to train 10th and 11th grade students as peer mediators, will meet weekly to develop mediation and restorative justice practices for the student body which will include facilitating circles. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-2019 school year Advisory Team Leaders Advisory Teams & Families 9th Grade students 2018-2019 school year Peer Group Connections teachers 10th and 11th grade peer mediators 2018-2019 school year Peer Mediation Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, all advisory teams will have developed a system of tracking communication with families so that all advisors reach out to families bi-weekly throughout the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 8  Restorative Justice training by DOE OSYD and Peer Group Connection (PGC) training by the Center for Supportive Schools Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019: 100% of Advisors will have developed lessons that teach students how to lead circles in advisory. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advisory Team Leaders will confirm that lessons have been taught. Progress will be measured through students' quarterly work product assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: 4.2: Teacher teams collaborate in departments within content areas to develop vertical plans that guide instruction from ninth to twelfth grade. Consistent and well-planned professional collaborations contribute to the continued progress toward a transition to a consortium school and improved student learning. A distributed leadership structure builds leadership capacity and provides teachers with a voice in key decisions that affect student learning across the school. In last year's Teacher Survey results, 91% of our teachers indicated that they had opportunities to work productively together. Teacher leadership continues to build a streamlined approach to curriculum development and pedagogical practices developed in department team meetings, advisory team meetings, professional learning communities, and grade team meetings. Vertical plans developed and shared throughout the teaching community allows for continuity, transparency, and skill / goal alignment for all students across grades and content areas. The clarity provided in these living documents directly affects curricula and instruction as they outline the evolution of key skills aligned to New York Performance Standards. 4.2 Teacher teams habitually and systematically analyze key elements of teacher work, including classroom practice, assessment data, and student work, for students they share or on whom they are focused. Teachers lead the deepening practice of mastery based grading and how assessments can best reflect standards. Professional learning communities allow teachers to analyze pedagogical practices, curriculum, and student work through multiple lenses. By meeting as grade level Professional Learning Communities and as a Vertical Team, teachers will meet to address curriculum gaps and provide cohesive reading and writing instruction school-wide. Teacher Teams will meet regularly to use Looking at Student Work Protocols in which they will determine areas of strengths and achievement gaps. Teams will identify next steps, plan scaffolds, and revise curriculum to support student learning. Needs: 4.2 Teacher teams should continue to develop, analyze, and assess mastery based grading, clarity unit plans, and standards criteria through critical professional development and professional learning communities. Teacher teams should continue to refine their systems for note taking during meetings in order to accurately capture and memorialize the important professional work being done and thus be able to share it within the team, itself, and among the teams in the school. Teacher teams should continue to utilize protocols for looking at student work, setting agendas, norming practices, and tracking student social, emotional, and academic progress. In last year's teacher survey 30% of our teachers feel that we do not measure new initiatives to ensure success. Part 2 – Annual Goal 0  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have participated in at least 6 Professional Learning Group sessions focused on developing non-scripted, cognitively engaging, inquiry curriculum and instruction. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Departments, grade teams and ICT partners will visit each other twice in the fall and twice in the spring. All classroom teachers There will be an open-door policy where teachers can informally visit each other to watch best practices and give each other feedback. In addition specific Professional Learning Groups will be formed studying effective instructional practices. All classroom teachers Department Chairs and Grade Team Leaders Department Chairs and Grade Team Leaders Visits will be conducted in November, January, March and May, 2018-2019 school year On-going throughout the 2018-2019 school year Teacher roundtables will be conducted where teachers reflect on meeting their individual, grade team and departmental goals, which will be aligned. Roundtables will be conducted in Professsional Learning Groups. Teachers will also use Professional Learning Groups to employ protocols to explore problems of practices. Problems of practice will include exploring best practices for teaching SWDs and ELLs. All classroom teacher January and June 2018-2019 Department Chairs and Grade Team Leaders All classroom teachers, focus on SWDs and ELLs At least three a semester, 2018-2019 school year Department Chairs and Grade Team Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent workshops organized and developed by teachers and members of our College Placement team based off of learning from the professional learning community groups will include curriculum supports in the area of reading and writing as well as best practices for helping support their students with disabilities or ENLs at home. Our library media specialist will continue to extend open access all day for parents to utilize resources (mylibrarynyc.com) to increase their involvement and engagement in their children’s education. Additional workshops will be offered based on reflections and feedback from parent surveys. 2  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Attendance Team, Success Mentors, Grade Teams, and Advisors Instructional Resources: Success Mentor best practices guidelines Schedule Adjustments: Weekly Attendance Team meetings, weekly Grade Team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019: 100% of teachers will have participated in at least 2 Professional Learning Group Intervisitations, 2 Professional Learning Group meetings, and 1 Teacher Reflective Roundtable by February of 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Lead Teachers will confirm each teacher has participated in Intervisitations, PLGs, and Teacher Roundtables; all teachers will submit a self-evaluation using the Danielson rubric to measure progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Overall course pass rates (school-wide average) have increased progressively over the past six semesters from 71.6% to 76.2% (scholarship reports 2015-16, 2016-17 & 2017-18). Needs: End-of-year department-wide course pass rates for all four core subject areas have been below 75% for the past two school years; some departments’ overall pass rate have dipped below 65% (scholarship reports 2016-17 & 2017-18). Multiple core subject teachers have year-end course pass rates below 65%, some in the 45%-55% range (scholarship reports 2016-17 & 2017-18). Leadership needs to provide more oversight of and direction for teachers in reaching higher course pass rates. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of teachers will bring their overall course pass rates up to at least 75%, or 80% for teachers whose pass rates were above 75% at the end of 2017-2018 in order to move more students to greater progress toward graduation. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Review MP6 course pass rate data from previous school year with Department Chairs: reflect, protocol of clarifying Qs (including understanding the math), next steps. Review MP6 course pass rate data from previous school year with individual teachers. Set goal of 75% (or 80%+ for teachers with high pass rates last year). Review MP3 (Semester 1) course pass rate data from Fall with Department Chairs and Grade Teams. Coaching plans developed and implemented by the Principal and Assistant Principals to coach and support teachers with low pass rates to improve. Review MP3 (Semester 1) course pass rate data from Fall with individual teachers who had Semester 1 pass rates lower than 85% (or their goal pass rate). Coach and support teachers to identify exactly which kids they’ll work with. Review MP5 course pass rate data with all teachers at End of Year /final debrief conferences. Identify exactly which kids they’ll work with. – targeted focus, especially on SWDs and ELLs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Dept. Chairs & All classroom teachers DC meeting and IPCs in September 2018 Principal and APs February 2019 February 2019 Department Chairs, Grade Team Leaders, Assistant Principals and Principal Principal and APs May 2019 Principal and APs Teachers who need support in bringing up pass rates Teachers who need support in bringing up pass rates All classroom teacher, focus on SWDs and ELLs How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 1. Progress reports will be sent home 5x per year and 1 Report Card in June. Advisors will make monthly outreach to families so that students and families will have a better understanding of exactly what students need to accomplish to be on track for graduation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 5  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: All teachers, Admin, guidance. Instructional Resources: Scholarship reports and data tracking system. Schedule Adjustments: Use of Parent Engagement time. Other: N/A Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018: 80% of teachers will be on track to have a 75% or higher pass rate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Overall pass rates from Scholarship Report data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: 100% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that, at their school, there is an expectation that teachers communicate regularly with parents/guardians. (Q9b) 91% of parents/guardians responded that since the beginning of the school year, they have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance sometimes or often. (Q4b) (City 84%) 91% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that teachers work closely with them to meet their child's needs. (Q1d) (City 89%) Needs: 93% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their child's school. (Q1e) (Need to close the gap between this and Strength number 1 from above). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 90% of Advisors will have formed strong school-family relationships through monthly contact with advisees' families. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Parent Teacher Association will hold two workshops (one in the fall semester and one in the spring semester) on the relationship between attendance and academic achievement 90% of advisors will use the Parent Engagement after school time to enter parent communication into the “BLS Family Call Log” for all of the families of their students. Parent Teacher Association, School Leadership Team Fall workshop by December 2018, Spring workshop by June 2019 All advisors Monthly, Team comprised of Advisors from all grade levels, administrators and veteran BLS staff Advisors, administrators and veteran BLS staff Advisors, administrators and veteran BLS staff Advisors, administrators and veteran BLS staff September - June, 2018-2019 school year September & February, 2018-2019 school year September & February, 2018-2019 school year All staff will participate in professional development in best practices for family outreach, including how to communicate with parents of SWD about needs and services. All Advisors, focus on SWD All teachers will be provided with professional development on how to use the New York City Language Line translation service to ensure communication with all ELL students. All advisors, focus on ELLs 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent Teacher Association, School Leadership Team Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Guidance Team, made up of Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Social Work Intern, and College Advisor Instructional Resources: Creation of “College and Career Readiness” Advisory curriculum; various external curricula used as resources 8  Schedule Adjustments: None beyond Guidance Team’s schedule to teach College Readiness courses Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. January: 90% of advisors will have made contact with 90% of families, as measured by the BLS Family Call Log. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. An internal document, the BLS Family Call Log, will be used to track the number of families advisors have made contact with. ATS RISA reports will be used to compare 2017-2018- attendance to 2018-2019 attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) ● Incoming 9 th graders who scored a 1 on the Grade 8 NYS ELA exam ● Returning students who failed one or more terms of English in the previous academic year. ● 11 th and 12 th graders who did not fulfill state exam requirements. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) ● Grade 9 Writing Intensive course ● Double-period English seminars ● Office hours – Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) ● Office hours – Small group & one-on-one tutoring and Academic Intervention tutoring Support When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Office hours Before or after classes Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday ● Saturday Regents Prep – Saturday mornings, December-January and May- services after and before school ● Saturday Regents Prep – Small groups June for targeted students ● Differentiated programming: ● Differentiated programming: daily ● Saturday Regents Prep - ELA morning sessions for students who have not yet passed Regents exams ● Differentiated programming with attention to special classes for under-performing students ● Collaborative Team Teaching model Throughout a lesson in a class. throughout a lesson. ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: T hroughout a lesson in class. ● Professional development: Teachers in the ELA Department meetings. ● Twilight Academy – Small classes of ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: daily throughout a lesson. ● Professional development: Every Wednesday after school; Tuesday 6 th period. ● Twilight Academy – Fall and Spring semester, 0  ● Professional development 15-20 students two evenings per week, 5-8pm, for ten weeks. with staff that trains educators and teaching teams around student support ● Twilight Academy – evening courses and targeted counseling support for undercredited 11 th and 12 th grade students ● Office hours – Tutoring services after and before school for targeted students ● Differentiated programming with attention to special classes for under-performing students ● Collaborative Team Teaching model Mathematics ● Incoming 9 th graders who scored a 1 on the Grade 8 NYS Math exam ● Returning students who failed one or more terms of math in previous academic year. ● 11 th and 12 th graders who did not fulfill state exam requirements. ● Office hours – Small group & one-on-one tutoring and Academic Intervention ● Office hours Before or after classes Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday ● Differentiated programming: daily Support throughout a lesson. ● F-Block activities: Small groups ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: ● Saturday Regents Prep – Small groups daily throughout a lesson. ● Differentiated programming: ● Professional development: Every Throughout a lesson in a class. Wednesday after school ● Professional development ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: with staff that trains educators T hroughout a lesson in class. ● Professional development: Teachers ● Twilight Academy – Fall and Spring semester, two evenings per week, 5-8pm, for ten weeks. 1  Science ● Returning students who failed one or more terms of Science the previous academic year. ● 11 th and 12 th graders who did not fulfill state exam requirements. and teaching teams around student support in the Math Department meetings. ● Twilight Academy – evening ● Twilight Academy – Small classes of courses and targeted counseling support for undercredited 11 th and 12 th grade students ● Office hours – Academic Intervention Services: tutoring services after and before school for targeted students ● Differentiated programming with attention to special classes for under-performing students ● Collaborative Team Teaching model ● Professional development with staff that trains educators and teaching teams around student support ● Twilight Academy – evening 15-20 students ● Office hours – Small group & one-on-one ● Office hours Before or after classes Monday-Friday ● Differentiated programming: daily throughout a lesson. ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: daily throughout a lesson. ● Professional development: Every Wednesday after school ● Twilight Academy – Fall and Spring semester, two evenings per week, 5-8pm, for ten weeks. tutoring and Academic Intervention Support ● Differentiated programming: Throughout a lesson in a class. ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: Throughout a lesson in class. ● Professional development: Teachers in the ELA Department meetings. ● Twilight Academy – Small classes of 15-20 students 2  Social Studies courses and targeted counseling support for undercredited 11 th and 12 th grade students ● Office hours – Academic Intervention Services: tutoring services after and before school for targeted students ● Differentiated programming with attention to special classes for under-performing students ● Incoming 9 th graders who scored a 1 on the Grade 8 NYS ELA exam . ● Returning students who failed one or more terms of Social Studies in the previous academic year. ● 11 th and 12 th graders who did not fulfill state exam requirements. ● Office hours – Small group & one-on-one tutoring and Academic Intervention ● Office hours Before or after classes Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday ● Differentiated programming: daily Support throughout a lesson. ● Differentiated programming: ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: Throughout a lesson in a class. daily throughout a lesson. ● Collaborative Team Teaching model: ● Professional development: Every ● Collaborative Team Teaching T hroughout a lesson in class. Wednesday after school model ● Professional development with staff that trains educators and teaching teams around student support ● Professional development: Teachers in the ELA Department meetings. ● Twilight Academy – Fall and Spring semester, two evenings per week, 5-8pm, for ten weeks. ● Twilight Academy – Small classes of 15-20 students ● Twilight Academy – evening courses and targeted counseling support for undercredited 11 th 3  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● Students with IEPs. ● Students with low attendance as determined by School Attendance Team. ● Under credited students as defined by the School STAR team ● Advisory: Small groups. ● Advisory: Two days a week ● Office of College Placement: Small groups and one-on-one ● Grade Summits: One-on-one. ● SBST: Team meeting . ● Student-run peer mediation program: Small group. ● 9th Grade Fire Side Chats: Small group. ● 11th Grade Fire Side Chats: Small group. Grade on-track, off- track, and slightly off-track meetings: Small group and one-on-one. ● Office of College Placement: 1x a month grades 9 to 11th. School Wide push happens in March with school wide College March Madness that focuses on the college admission process.12 th grade has course 1x a week during Fall semester. ● Grade Summits: Three times a year (usually mid term ) ● ●● ● SBST: Weekly. ● Student-run peer mediation program: As needed. ● 9th Grade Fire Side Chats: In December. ● 11th Grade Fire Side Chats: In February. Grade on-track, off-track and 12 th grade students ● Advisory: Academic support via advisory and one-on-one parent/guidance meetings ● Office of College Placement (OCP): OCP supports students over four years in their college application process through pullout and push-in services to advisory to build awareness of academic standing ● Grade Team Meetings: Information gathering and sharing with staff around high risk students and their needs ● STAR Team: Inquiry team work that identifies academically 4  at-risk students on each grade level and facilitates grade-wide interventions ● SBST: Regular school based support team meetings to plan for neediest students ● Attendance Team: Monitors student attendance and does home visits for LTA students. ● Student-run peer mediation program ● 9 th Grade Orientation ● 11 th and 12 th Grade Fire Side Chats ● 12 th Grade on-track, off-track, and slightly off-track meetings ● Boys Group – psychotherapeutic groups for select 5  boys with severe academic and social underachievement Council for Unity ● Mandated Counseling – counseling provided by social worker for IEP students with mandated counseling 6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Bronx Lab School has 37 Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Bronx Lab School makes every effort to make outreach to every student/family who is identified as Students in Temporary Housing (STH). The Family Worker works collaboratively with the school Social Worker to identify, make outreach to families, and determine our support for STH. Normally, the Social Worker would conference with identified STH as well as families in temporary housing to determine specific needs. This include, but not limited to: In-school Counseling 1. 2. Connecting students/families to school resources and outside agencies The school Family Worker would make the necessary outreach to families and meet with students/families to: 1. Ensure that the STH maintain an active presence in school by monitoring the student’s daily attendance. 2. Provide financial support in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780. Conduct follow up check-ins with student/family to determine current housing status. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A -- Bronx Lab is Title I 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7  N/A -- Bronx Lab is Title I 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A -- Bronx Lab is Title I 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: Bronx Lab School has a four-phase hiring process to ensure that we recruit highly qualified teachers. Phase I: Read through resumes and screen for candidates whose experience match the goals of our mission and instructional philosophy. Phase II: Candidate(s) participate in a screening interview with teachers of perspective department where they get to participating in a discussion about their teaching philosophy, instructional strategies, and supporting Bronx Lab School’ instructional mission. Phase III: Selected candidates are invited back to lesson plan/demo lesson session in perspective teaching class. Admin and department teachers observe lesson then debrief with candidate(s). Phase IV: In the final state of the selection procession, only candidates who demonstrate skills that are aligned to the Bronx Lab School philosophy are invited to a formal interview with department heads and administration. We ensure that our teachers are HQT. Retention and Support: We retain our teachers through ongoing supportive professional experience and development. First- and Second-Year Teachers and teachers new to Bronx Lab: Paired with a formal mentor who meets with them on an ongoing basis for curricular planning help, observations, feedback, classroom management support, and acculturation into Bronx Lab. All Teachers: Professional support through Lead Teacher, who observes 2+ times per semester, provides feedback and guidance. Supports from administration who provide ongoing support through observation, reflective feedback and guidance. Teachers receive ongoing professional development through Faculty Gathering meetings, including whole-staff, department meetings, grade and advisory team meetings. Additionally, all teachers have opportunities to participate in external PDs and workshops, including leadership, mentoring training, discipline-specific, classroom management, and curricular design, etc. 9  2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). As a small school, staff collaboration has been a foundational practice of Bronx Lab since its inception. Departments, grade teams and advisory teams are all given time for weekly or bi-weekly meetings while grade level teaching teams meet to plan and develop curriculum. Department Chair meetings to determine staff-wide PD around state standards (including instructional strategies, Habits of Mind development, Evidence-Based Claims curricular development). Department meetings to further develop CCSS units. Teacher-Lead Teacher observations and meetings to support implementation of CCSS units External PDs on CCSS-aligned practices Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 0  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In May 2014, Bronx Lab School became a Consortium school, which provides us the opportunity to teach students fundamental skills that will prepare them for college, career, and life. Skills such as critical thinking, habits of mind, and life-long skills of high level reading, writing, research, and problem solving. To achieve this, staff collaboration has been a fundamental part of how Bronx Lab school makes decisions regarding the use and selection of assessments for our students. And, as we make the shift to a Consortium school, the school-wide use of Consortium rubrics, our initial steps to create departmental vertical alignment by making sure that all grade levels design diagnostics, Gateway2 and Gateway4 around the Consortium rubric. To improve students outcomes, develop teacher instructional practices, and to create a sustainable instructional framework, it’s important that:  Bronx Lab staff meets every Wednesday for Faculty Gathering. These weekly, 90 minute meetings have included professional development on unit writing, assessment as well as staff to staff presentations to share best practices.  Departments, grade teams and advisory teams are all given time for weekly or bi-weekly meetings while grade level teaching teams meet to plan and develop curriculum.  Teachers collaboratively design and implement Performance Based Assessment Tasks (PBAT) projects and panels in 11th and 12th grade core classes. These which are being designed by all teachers (in department teams, mostly, but with support from Learning Support—special educators--and Grade Teams). These projects assess students school-wide on critical thinking skills and HOM, as evidenced by original student work products.  Analysis by teachers of the school wide Local Assessment, specifically identifying key skills/concepts that students need improvement on and ways to address said skills/concepts throughout lessons  Teachers regularly participate in professional developments, workshops, and conferences to build on their understanding and assessment of Habits of Mind, critical thinking, building on Evidence Based Claims, and student-centered inquiry.  Within departments, teachers collectively decide on observation schedule to conduct inter-visitation participate in inter-visitation and  Decision made by individual teachers on observation schedule that will best help them inform and improve their instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 1  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 434,597.00 0 11,200.00 0 2,629,317.00 X X X 5E 5B, D 5A, B, C, D, E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another 2  purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 3  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Bronx Lab School makes the necessary efforts to provide parents with more information about the school, its goals and their students' learning. We have developed rigorous communication with parents to maintain their engagement with the school and their child's achievements. The school provides information to parents through mailings, PTA meetings, workshop, notices, email phone contact, information circulars, SchoolMessanger calls, school website and through our Parent Outreach Committee within our Attendance Team. Bronx Lab School agrees to implement the following statutory requirements: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  The school will put into operation programs, activities and procedures for the involvement of parents, consistent with section 1118 of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA). Those programs, activities and procedures will be planned and operated with meaningful consultation with parents of participating children.  The school will ensure that the required school-level parental involvement policy meets the requirements of section 1118(b) of the ESSA, and includes, as a component, a school-parent compact consistent with section 1118(d) of the ESSA.  The school will incorporate this parental involvement policy into its school improvement plan.  In carrying out the Title I, Part A parental involvement requirements, to the extent practicable, the school will provide full opportunities for the participation of parents with limited English proficiency, parents with disabilities, and parents of migratory children, including providing information and school reports required under section 1111 of the ESSA in an understandable and uniform format and, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language parents understand.  The school will involve the parents of children served in Title I, Part A programs in decisions about how the 1 percent of Title I, Part A funds reserved for parental involvement is spent. 4   The school will be governed by the following statutory definition of parental involvement, and will carry out programs, activities and procedures in accordance with this definition: Parental involvement means the participation of parents in regular, two-way, and meaningful communication involving student academic learning and other school activities, including ensuring that parents play an integral role in assisting their child’s learning;    that parents are encouraged to be actively involved in their child’s education at school; that parents are full partners in their child’s education and are included, as appropriate, in decision-making and on advisory committees to assist in the education of their child; the carrying out of other activities, such as those described in section 1118 of the ESSA; that the school will inform parents and parental organizations of the purpose and existence of the Parental Information and Resource Center in the State. This policy will be reviewed in May of every school year. The PTA will decide and evaluate the policy and decide on changes, revision will be finalized by the end of June for implementation of the subsequent school year. Parental Involvement and School Quality 1. Bronx Lab School will take the following actions to involve parents in the joint development of its school parental involvement plan under section 1112 of the ESSA: a. Parent Association meetings are held each month, on the third Thursdays, on an ongoing basis. In addition, an executive committee of the Parent Association meets frequently to discuss all school matters. This executive committee serves as the School Leadership Team for Bronx Lab School, and includes parent, student, staff and CBO representation.  Bronx Lab School will take the following actions to involve parents in the process of school review and improvement under section 1116 of the ESSA: Active SLT that reviews student performance data and assesses needs and direction of school. Bronx Lab School will provide the following necessary coordination, technical assistance, and other support in planning and implementing effective parental involvement activities to improve student academic achievement and school performance. Bronx Lab School will take the following actions to conduct, with the involvement of parents, an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parental involvement policy in improving school quality. The evaluation will include identifying barriers to greater participation by parents in parental involvement activities (with particular attention to parents who are economically disadvantaged, are disabled, have limited English proficiency, have limited literacy, or are of any racial or ethnic minority background). The school will use the findings of the evaluation about its parental involvement policy and activities to design strategies for more effective parental involvement, and to revise, if necessary (and with the involvement of parents) its parental involvement policies. 1. SLT will at regular meetings discuss goals and objectives of the school, progress toward said goals using data on student outcomes. Bronx Lab School will build the schools’ and parent’s capacity for strong parental involvement, in order to ensure effective involvement of parents and to support a partnership with the parents, and the community to improve student academic achievement, through the following activities specifically described below: 5  a. The school will provide assistance to parents of children served by the school, as appropriate, in understanding topics such as the following, by undertaking the actions described in this paragraph –    the State’s academic content standards the State’s student academic achievement standards the State and local academic assessments including alternate assessments, the requirements of Part A, how to monitor their child’s progress, and how to work with educators: (List activities, such as workshops, conferences, classes, both in-State and out-of-State, including any equipment or other materials that may be necessary to ensure success.) b. The school will provide materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their children’s academic achievement, such as literacy training, and using technology, as appropriate, to foster parental involvement, by:  Parenting workshops via our CBO, Wilmer Hale Law Firm, and MMCC  Frequent outreach and interaction between students and advisors c. The school will, with the assistance of its parents, educate its teachers, pupil services personnel, principal and other staff, in how to reach out to, communicate with, and work with parents as equal partners, in the value and utility of contributions of parents, and in how to implement and coordinate parent programs and build ties between parents and schools, by:  Organizing active parent outreach via Bronx Lab School parent coordinator and staff  Organizing clear communication between advisors, students and parents through clear programming and protocols including training for staff d. The school will, to the extent feasible and appropriate, coordinate and integrate parental involvement programs and activities, such as parent resource centers, that encourage and support parents in more fully participating in the education of their children, by:  Parent programming via MMCC, our CBO community partner  Active outreach by Director of College Placement to parents to build awareness of college application process  Active SLT programming and outreach  Active programming and outreach by parent coordinator and family paraprofessional e. The school will take the following actions to ensure that information related to the school and parent- programs, meetings, and other activities, is sent to the parents of participating children in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative formats upon request, and, to the extent practicable, in a language the parents can understand:  Regular parent meetings  Regular SLT meetings   Letters and newsletters sent home to parents Frequent phone calls from teachers and school administrators to parents, via Bronx Lab School’s distributive counseling model Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement In building deeper and strong parent involvement and relationships, Bronx Lab School will:  involve parents in the development of training for teachers, principals, and other educators to improve the effectiveness of that training;  provide necessary literacy training for parents from Title I, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training; 6     immediately notifying parents of absences and tardiness of students, and calling Problem Solving Conferences as needed to address these concerns pay reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school-related meetings and training sessions; train parents to enhance the involvement of other parents; in order to maximize parental involvement and participation in their children’s education, arrange school meetings at a variety of times, or conducting in-home conferences between teachers or other educators, who work directly with participating children, with parents who are unable to attend those conferences at school; adopt and implement model approaches to improving parental involvement;   develop appropriate roles for community-based organizations and businesses, including faith-based organizations, in parental involvement activities; and  Provide other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under section 1118 as parents may request School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx Lab School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. I. School Responsibilities The Bronx Lab School will: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 1. Provide high-quality instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment that enables all students to exceed the State’s student academic achievement standards and matriculate into college. 2. Communicate regularly with parents regarding student achievements, progress and concerns. 3. Inform parents of students’ academic progress on a regular basis by:  Disseminating progress reports in October, December, February, and May.  Holding parent-teacher conferences in October and March.  Providing an annual report of students’ progress toward graduation.   Involve and inform parents in student work and achievement through several school-wide evening events (E.g., Jazz Concerts, Internship Presentations, Talent Shows, Awards Assemblies and Grade-wide Celebrations). Inform parents of school-wide events, parent events, and PA meetings through email, phone calls, newsletters, and personal outreach. All communication from the school will be in an understandable and uniform format, including alternative languages and formats, to the extent possible. Involve parents in the planning, review, and improvement of school-wide programs.   Hold an annual parent meeting to inform and explain the school’s participation in Title I, Part A program. The meeting will include information about the requirements for participation in the Title I, Part A program. The school will convene the meeting at a convenient time, and will offer a flexible number of additional parental involvement meetings to include as many parents as possible.  Provide parents with reasonable access to staff through email, phone and face-to-face meetings.  Offer parents opportunities to volunteer, observe, and participate in classroom activities.  Promote a culture of respect among students and staff by upholding norms for appropriate behavior and dress. 7   Demonstrate an appreciation for diversity of students and staff with respect to race, gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation and religion. Bronx Lab School will: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  Assure that students have an easily contactable single-point-of-contact in each student’s advisor.  Assure that students advisors are making regular parent contact each month.  Immediately notify parents of absences and tardiness of students, and calling Problem Solving Create parent/school conferences as needed to address concerns (pay reasonable and necessary expenses associated with parental involvement activities, including transportation and child care costs, to enable parents to participate in school-related meetings and training sessions);  Arrange school meetings at a variety of times, or conducting in-home conferences between teachers or other educators, who work directly with participating children, with parents who are unable to attend those conferences at school; Bronx Lab School will: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Assure that students have an easily contactable single-point-of-contact in each student’s advisor.  Assure that students advisors are making regular parent contact each month.  Invite parents to attend student Round Tables and Panels during Regent’s week to be involved in assessing their student’s growth in regards to the skills and content standards laid out for each course.  Continue our open-door policy that allows families the opportunity to come in at their convenience to meet with their student’s counselor, advisor, dean or regular teachers. Bronx Lab will: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Connect families with outside agencies and support providers for  provide necessary literacy training for parents from Title I, Part A funds, if the school district has exhausted all other reasonably available sources of funding for that training;  Provide, through our Parent Association, regular scheduled workshops and activities to enhance life skills (e.g. personal finance workshops, financial aid workshops, understanding media workshops, etc.)  Train parents to enhance the involvement of other parents;  Develop appropriate roles for community-based organizations and businesses, including faith-based organizations, in parental involvement activities; and  Provide other reasonable support for parental involvement activities under section 1118 as parents may request. I. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: Parents will: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  1. Ensure his/her child’s timeliness and daily attendance.  2. Inform the school of any planned absences, tardiness, or changes in phone number and address. 8  3. Ensure his/her child comes to school prepared with the materials necessary to learn.  4. Check in with his/her child regularly regarding assignments and preparation for exams.  5. Understand and promote the development of knowledge and skills necessary to graduate from high school and matriculate into college.  6. Participate in and communicate with the school by email, phone, or face-to-face meetings regarding decisions related to his/her child’s education.  7. Encourage his/her child’s participation in enrichment programs.  8. Acknowledge and respond promptly and accordingly to all mail, email, and phone notices from the school by promptly reading or listening to all school communication Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; come to school prepared with the materials necessary to learn complete his/her homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for his/her actions; show respect for self, other people and property;       make efforts to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;   seek support from school during periods of conflict, crisis, personal needs; always try his/her best to learn. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: During the regular school day, ELLs are programmed for heterogeneous content classes with ENL Push In support or Integrated Content and ENL to better accommodate ELLs course programming for NYS graduation requirements. The Title III Instructional Programs focus on two overarching areas: Academic Literacy Enrichment and Presentation Skills. Ms. Bibi F. Hussain-Santana, a NYS certified ENL teacher, is the coordinator for the Title III program and facilitates the programs before school and on Saturdays. The Title III afterschool programs provide sheltered instruction in literacy and expository writing in themes which align to their History and English Language Arts courses as well as hands on projects that support their math and science courses. The language of instruction is English with students using native language to support understanding and promote communication. Native Language Support is offered to all ELLs after school as the ENL teacher and Math teacher both speak Spanish which is the dominant language spoken by our ELLs and technological assistance is used to provide support in low frequency Native Languages. Instructional Activity #1: After School Program in World Cultures & Literacy EnrichmentHours: 22Amount: $1,215.06October 2016 – May 2017 Monday 3:15 pm- 4:15 pm 1 ENL teacher x 1 hour a week x 22 weeks = 22 hours Instructor: Amanda Tobier, ENL TeacherLanguage of Instruction: English with Native Language Support through technology The program is aligned to support students in their 9th & 10th grade Global and ELA courses. The Spring 2016 PBAT data showed 60% of BLS ELLs struggled to earn credits in Global and U.S. History courses and pass the History Roundtables and PBATs. Once a week, 15 ELLs in 9th – 10th grade will explore foreign films, short stories, music and visual art from a variety of world cultures. During the weekly sessions, students will discuss cultural differences, similarities and conflicts as seen in the artifacts they will explore. ELLs will keep a journal to sketch, generate questions, and write reflective passages. ELLs will be taught to use library and online resources. Students will consider the role religious beliefs, cultural values, and personal biases play in causing conflicts and various ways the conflicts were resolved. These discussions assist ELLs in their acculturation process in addition to introducing them to conflict resolution techniques. Sample literature and films include, but is not limited to: “Vivah”, “Dil Se”, “Mission Kashmir”, “Before We Were Free”, “Lady and a Tiger”, “The Stoning of Soraya M.: A Story of Injustice in Iran” and Mayan legends. supplement supplement Instructional Activity #2: Before School Program in Academic Literacy & Writing EnrichmentHours: 44Amount: $2,430.12October 2016 – May 2017 Tuesday & Thursday 7:30 am- 8:30 am 1 ENL teacher x 2 hours a week x 22 weeks = 44 hours Instructor: Bibi F. Hussain-Santana, ENL TeacherLanguage of Instruction: English with Direct Native Language Support in Spanish and Technology assisted Native Language Support for Low Frequency Languages The program is aligned to support upperclassmen in their English Literature & History courses and Target Language Acquisition. On the 2016 NYSESLAT no ELLs earned a Commanding. The Spring 2016 PBAT data showed 60% of BLS ELLs struggled to earn credits in U.S. History courses and pass PBATs. In addition, ELLs placed in the English Regents course with the ENL teacher had an 80% pass rate on the English Regents in January 2016, whereas ELLs in the mainstream English Regents course earned less than a 30% pass rate on the June 2016 Regents. In order to supplement the language development in the 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Integrated Content classes, direct language instruction in all four modalities will be provided by the veteran ENL teacher during morning sessions. The morning sessions will allow ELLs to attend the after school academic support sessions and office hours with with content teachers. Twice a week, 20 ELLs in grades 10-12 will analyze speeches, essays, articles and other primary sources to deconstruct arguments and develop their own position on a variety of issues. During the weekly sessions, students will discuss cultural differences, similarities and conflicts as seen in the artifacts they will explore. ELLs will be taught to use MLA Formatting, library and online resources as well as word processing and Power Point Programs. Class discussions will assist ELLs in their acculturation process in addition to introducing them to conflict resolution techniques through structured debate. Sample documentary films and broadcasts to be used include, but are not limited to: “Central Park Five”, “2016 Presidential Debates” and “Freakonomics” Instructional Activity #3: After School Program in Scientific Thinking Enrichment ProgramHours: 22Amount: $1,215.06October 2016 - May 2017 Thursday 3:15 pm- 4:15 pm 1 Bilingual Content Teacher x 1 hour a week x 20 weeks = 20 hours Instructor: Cesar Rey, Science Teacher, Fluent in Spanish, and currently in TESOL certification program Language of Instruction: English with Direct Native Language Support in Spanish and Technology assisted Native Language Support for Low Frequency Languages The program is open to 20 ELLs in grades 9th, 10th &12th enrolled in Physics, Algebra, Geometry and Algebra 2. Cesar Rey, the Physics teacher who is fluent in Spanish, will teach a Math and Science Enrichment course for one hour session once a week for 20 weeks. He will be supported by Ms. Bibi F. Hussain-Santana, the ENL teacher and Title III Coordinator All 9th, 10th and 11th grade ELLs are scheduled for the program because the data from 2015-16 Roundtables and PBATs showed the 30% of ELLs that failed did not attend Office Hours or Saturday Academy. Mr. Rey will facilitate projects that will reinforce scientific method, critical thinking, math skills and academic literacy specific to math and physical science. The program will address skill gaps and foundational arithmetic skills to help ELLs access increasingly difficult algebraic content and the word problems by using hands on activities not through remediation. Essential Skills Math Teaching and Practice Software was previously purchased by the school and will be used to promote math skills through computer games. * Ms. Hussain-Santana will be on site but will not receive funds from the Title III Grant for the after school sessions on Thursdays. Ms. Tobier is a New York Teaching Fellow with a Trans B Certification and an appointed ENL Teacher. Mr. Rey is a certified Math teacher currently enrolled in an Advance Certificate TESOL Program. Both of these instructors are new to providing ELL support services; therefore, Ms. Hussain-Santana has agreed to be on hand to assist. Instructional Activity #4 Saturday Academy: From Backpack to BriefcaseHours: 20Amount: $1,104.60January 2016 & May 2017 Saturday 9am-2pm Fall: One Session Spring: One Session 1 ENL Teacher x 5 hours x 2 workshops = 10 hours Instructor: Bibi F. Hussain, ENL Teacher 1 Content Teacher x 5 hours x 2 workshops = 10 hours Instructor: Noel Eaton, Social Studies Teacher Language of Instruction: English with Direct Native Language Support in Spanish and Technology assisted Native Language Support for Low Frequency Languages The workshops will have students practice their listening and speaking skills for professional settings such as presentations and interviews. Teachers will conduct mock job interviews, Roundtables, PBATs and college tours to allow students to practice English in different settings for a variety of purposes. Students will have a chance to videotape an interview, Roundtable or PBAT and assess their speaking skills. 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information *No administrator will be paid through the Title III monies because these session will coincide with the school's Saturday Regents Prep sessions. The Regents Prep sessions are funded through the A.N.A. Grant, we will use their building permit and administrator. Instructional Activity #5 Saturday Explorers: Fieldtrips to Explore Various CulturesHours: 30Amount: $1,659.90January 2017 – April 2017 Saturday 9am-2pm Fall: One Session Spring: Two Sessions 1 ENL Teacher x 5 hours x 3 trips = 15 hours Instructor: Bibi F. Hussain, ENL Teacher 1 Content Teacher x 5 hours x 3 trips = 15 hours Instructor: Noel Eaton, Social Studies Teacher Language of Instruction: English with Direct Native Language Support in Spanish and Technology assisted Native Language Support for Low Frequency Languages Fall #1 Analyzing World Cultures Through Celebration: Chinatown Chinese New Year January 2017Spring #1 Life in Medieval Times: CloistersSpring #2 Pre-Columbian Cultures in North America: National Museum of the American IndianSpring #3 Immigration in New York City: Tenement Museum In conjunction with the exploration of literature and history content classes, there will be two Saturday trips to a museum whose exhibits are dedicated to the understanding and preservation of the cultural heritage of different ethnic groups in New York City and an cultural celebration. Students will explore cultural identity through the museums’ collections, exhibitions, and related educational programs. Through art and artifacts, students will explore shared human values for people of various religious and cultural backgrounds. Students will learn to analyze the museums’ primary and secondary sources and make inferences about the societies’ histories, values, and rituals based on these sources. Students will use their guided travel journals to generate questions and note observations. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Learning Community: Scaffolding Core Content for ELLsHours: 24Amount:$1,325.5210.7% of Total Allocated Title III Funds Wednesday 3:30 – 4:30 pm1 TESOL Teacher x 1 hour x 6 sessions = 6 hours 2 Science Teachers x 1 hour x 6 sessions = 12 hours 1 English Language Arts Teacher x 1 hour x 6 sessions = 6 hours Fall Sessions: Topic #1 Teaching with the Four Modalities and Five Proficiency Levels in MindTopic #2 Generating and Implementing Language Goals in Content Classes Topic #3 Identifying and Creating Visual and Tactile Entry Points for ELLs in Content Classes Spring Sessions: Topic #1 Creating Inclusive Classrooms Through Cooperative Learning Groups for ELLs & Generating Tiered QuestionsTopic #2 Determining Scaffolding and Wait Time for ELLs of All ProficienciesTopic #3 Critical Friends Tuning Protocol Looking at Planning and Student Work Through the Lens of Language Acquisition Facilitator: Bibi F. Hussain-Santana, the ELL Coordinator and ENL Teacher, and has eleven years of experience teaching 3  Part C: Professional Development free standing sheltered instruction in English and Social Studies. She has also served as a Cooperating Teacher for CUNY, Hunter TESOL Program, mentored new teachers and co-facilitated a professional development session with Affinity. Dr. Janet Gerard, Cesar Rey and Ethan Nichols are the three content area teachers pursuing TESOL certifications at Touro College and will participate in a professional learning community (PLC) discussing various entry points, reviewing methods of differentiated informal assessments, and scaffolding content for ELLs in an inclusive setting. The PLC will meet three Wednesday sessions in the fall and three in the Spring. Teachers are asked to use the time between the sessions to implement the strategies developed in the PLC, conduct intervisitations and share findings with the group members via email. The primary text for the PLC will be Classroom Instruction That Works with English Language Learners by Jane Hill and Kathleen Flynn with its accompanying Facilitator's Guide. There will be opportunities to focus on professional text excerpts from: The Skillful Teacher: Building Your Teaching Skills by Jon Saphier and Mary Ann Haley-Speca; Teach Like a Champion 2.0: 62 Techniques that Put Students on the Path to College by Doug Lemov and Norman Atkins; Teach Like a Champion Field Guide: A Practical Resource to Make the 49 Techniques Your Own by Doug Lemov; Scaffolding Reading Experiences for ELLs by Fitzgerald and Graves 2004; and When Kids Can’t Read, by Kylene Beers. Critical Friends tuning protocols and informal discussions around experiences of success and struggles will be a significant component of the PLC. These professional texts were selected because research tells us that when students have the academic language scaffolded for them, there are dramatic increases in learning. (Jim Cummins, University of Toronto). As a PLC, we will explore the kinds of instruction that will fully promote English Language Learners linguistic and academic potential. Another reason we selected this focus is to help teachers construct creative links between theory and practice, while providing the opportunity to discuss what works and what does not with colleagues. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Workshops Hours: 24 Amount: $1,325.5210.7% of Total Allocated Title III Funds Fall: Two Sessions Spring: Two Sessions Weekday Evening Session 4:30 – 7:30pm 1 TESOL Teacher x 3 hour x 2 Workshops = 6 hours 1 Bilingual Content Teacher x 3 hour x 2 workshops = 6 hours Saturday Morning Session 10:00 - 1:00pm 1 TESOL Teacher x 3 hour x 2 Workshops = 6 hours 1 Bilingual Content Teacher x 3 hour x 2 workshops = 6 hours 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Fall Session #1Skedula (Online Grading) & Online Resources for English Language Learners (ELLs) How should English Language Learners prepare at home for the Regents, PBATs and NYSESLAT? Connect With Community Based Organizations: Mosholu Montefiore Community Center, FEGS Clinic, Wilmer Hale Law Firm, and Beacon Program Fall Session #2Skedula (Online Grading) & Online Resources for English Language Learners (ELLs) What are the Test Modifications for English Language Learners? How Can I Help My Child Study at Home? What Financial Resources are Available for My Child to Attend College?Connect With Community Based Organizations: Mosholu Montefiore Community Center, FEGS Clinic, Wilmer Hale Law Firm, and Beacon Program Spring Session #1Skedula (Online Grading) & Online Resources for English Language Learners (ELLs) How Should English Language Learners prepare at home for the Regents, PBATs and NYSESLAT? What Summer Programs Are Available For My Child? Connect With Community Based Organizations: Mosholu Montefiore Community Center, FEGS Clinic, Wilmer Hale Law Firm, and Beacon Program Spring Session #2 Skedula (Online Grading) & Online Resources for English Language Learners (ELLs) Promoting Literacy at Home for English Language Learners How to Practice Math at Home for English Language Learners Summer Learning Opportunities for English Language Learners Connect With Community Based Organizations: Mosholu Montefiore Community Center, FEGS Clinic, Wilmer Hale Law Firm, and Beacon Program Parents of our ELLs will be invited to participate in two fall and two spring two and a half hour long workshops. Many of our ELLs will be the first in their families to graduate high school in New York City and the first to attend college. Some parents struggle with helping their children with content at home because the material is in the Target Language. For this reason, Bibi F. Hussain-Santana will offer the following sessions: Skedula (Online Grading) & Online Resources; What are Regents? What are PBATs? What is the NYSESLAT? How should my child prepare at home?; What are ELL Test Modifications? How to Help Your Child Study at Home; Promoting Literacy at Home; How to Practice Math at Home; Summer Learning Opportunities. We will explore strategies and have access to resources for helping support their children at home from sessions such as: establishing a study time and space at home; free tutoring resources; and accessing the online grading program. Helping parents access summer learning opportunities is important because students lose the gains they have made during the academic year when they do not practice English at home during the breaks. A Spanish speaking content teacher will support our ENL teacher in providing translation in Spanish for families as necessary. Phone calls, flyers, emails and School Messenger calls and texts will be broadcast in Spanish and English to advertise these events. On an individual basis, the Translation Unit will be utilized to invite parents who speak a low frequency native language. The ENL Teacher and Advisors will also explain the events to their advisees and provide reminders. Parents of our ELLs will be invited to participate in two fall and two spring two and a half hour long workshops. Many of our ELLs will be the first in their families to graduate high school in New York City and the first to attend college. Some parents struggle with helping their children with content at home because the material is in the Target Language. For this reason, Bibi F. Hussain-Santana will offer the following sessions: Skedula (Online Grading) & Online Resources; What are Regents? What are PBATs? What is the NYSESLAT? How should my child prepare at home?; What are ELL Test Modifications? How to Hep Your Child Study at Home; Promoting Literacy at Home; How to Practice Math at Home; Summer Learning 5  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Opportunities. They will learn strategies and have access to resources for helping support their children at home from sessions such as: establishing a study time and space at home; free tutoring resources; and accessing the online grading program. Helping parents access summer learning opportunities is important because students lose the gains they have made during the academic year when they do not practice English during the summer. A Spanish speaking content teacher will support our ENL teacher in providing translation in Spanish for families as necessary. Phone calls, flyers, emails and School Messenger calls and texts will be broadcast in Spanish, Urdu, Albanian and English to advertise these events. The Translation Unit will be utilized to communicate with families who speak a low frequency native language. The ENL Teacher and Advisors will also explain the events to their advisees and provide reminders. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Title III Direct Instruction Component Instructional Activity #1: After School Program in World Cultures & Literacy Enrichment Hours: 22 Amount: $1,215.06 October 2016 – May 2017 Monday 3:15 pm- 4:15 pm 1 ENL teacher x 1 hour a week x 22 weeks = 22 hours Instructor: Amanda Tobier, ENL Teacher Instructional Activity #2: Before School Program in Academic Literacy & Writing Enrichment Hours: 44 Amount: $2,430.12 October 2016 – May 2017 Tuesday & Thursday 7:30 am- 8:30 am 1 ENL teacher x 2 hours a week x 22 weeks = 44 hours Instructor: Bibi F. Hussain-Santana, ENL Teacher Instructional Activity #3: After School Program in Scientific Thinking Enrichment Program Hours: 22 Amount: $1,215.06 October 2016 - May 2017 Thursday 3:15 pm- 4:15 pm 1 Bilingual Content Teacher x 1 hour a week x 20 weeks = 20 hours Instructor: Cesar Rey, Science Teacher, Fluent in Spanish, and currently in TESOL certification program Instructional Activity #4 Saturday Academy: From Backpack to Briefcase Hours: 20 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount Amount: $1,104.60 January 2016 & May 2017 Saturday 10am-2pm Fall: One Session Spring: One Session 1 ENL Teacher x 5 hours x 2 workshops = 10 hours Instructor: Bibi F. Hussain, ENL Teacher 1 Content Teacher x 5 hours x 2 workshops = 10 hours Instructor: Noel Eaton, Social Studies Teacher Instructional Activity #5 Saturday Explorers: Field trips to Explore Various Cultures Hours: 30 Amount: $1,659.90 January 2017 – April 2017 Saturday 10am-2pm Fall: One Session Spring: Two Sessions 1 ENL Teacher x 5 hours x 3 trips = 15 hours Instructor: Bibi F. Hussain, ENL Teacher 1 Content Teacher x 5 hours x 3 trips = 15 hours Instructor: Noel Eaton, Social Studies Teacher Title III Professional Development Component: Professional Learning Community: Scaffolding Core Content for ELLs Hours: 24 Amount:$1,325.52 10.7% of Total Allocated Title III Funds Wednesday 3:30 – 4:30 pm 1 TESOL Teacher x 1 hour x 6 sessions = 6 hours 2 Science Teachers x 1 hour x 6 sessions = 12 hours 1 English Language Arts Teacher x 1 hour x 6 sessions = 6 hours Title III Parent Engagement Component: 7  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount Parent Workshops Hours: 24 Amount: $1,325.52 10.7% of Total Allocated Title III Funds Fall: Two Sessions Spring: Two Sessions Weekday Evening Session 4:30 – 7:30pm 1 TESOL Teacher x 3 hour x 2 Workshops = 6 hours 1 Bilingual Content Teacher x 3 hour x 2 workshops = 6 hours Saturday Morning Session 10:00 - 1:00pm 1 TESOL Teacher x 3 hour x 2 Workshops = 6 hours 1 Bilingual Content Teacher x 3 hour x 2 workshops = 6 hours N/A Purchased services N/A  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must $2,090.22 be supplemental.  Additional curricula, New York Times Teacher Digital Subscription $227 Flocabulary Subscription $95 Tenement Museum Entrance Fees Adult $25 x 2 Children $20 x 30 Subtotal $650.00 per exhibit Two Interactive Exhibits: $1,300.00 Museum of Chinese in America 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Budgeted Amount instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $0 $0 $0 $12,366. Adult $10 x 2 Children $5 x 30 Total $170.00 Remaining$298.22: Video Library Purchases Foreign Films and Documentaries “Lost Girls” “Dancing with Wolves” “Freakonomics” “The Story of Us” “Guns, Germs and Steel” “Provoked” “Water” Audiobook Purchases Joy Luck Club by Amy Tan The Absolutely True Diary of a Part Time Indian by Sherman Alexie $12,366.00 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Bronx Lab School Borough Bronx School Number 265 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Sarah Marcy Coach Christine Bernard ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Amanda TobierBibi Hussain Sant Teacher/Subject Area Gina Machado, Spec Ed Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Serena Paredes Superintendent Kathy Rehfield-Pelles Assistant Principal Nilda Dontaine Coach Jacob Prairie School Counselor Lisa Pietrangolare Parent Carol Notice Parent Coordinator Letys Mejia Field Support Center Staff Member David Walsh Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 481 0 Total number of ELLs 36 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 7.48%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Most incoming ELLs enter with a 4th grade reading level and most incoming ELLs with an IEP enter with a 3rd grade reading level. Mastery of identified learning standards assessed in every class to assist teachers and students in monitoring proficiency progress through the use of teacher created assessment Scantron Performance Series Reading Assessment used to acquire baseline in literacy proficiency. ENL teachers conduct close reading activities to support those reading below grade levels, to monitor their progress, and inform their instruction in the classroom and in the design of our Title lll program. 1  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Scheduled dates for ENL teachers to administer Scantron Performance Series. Department teams conduct kid talk and monitor student progress in mastery of learning standards Teacher teams utilize Looking at Student Work Protocols to assess the teaching and mastery of learning standards. ENL Dept. Meetings reviewing data and devising plan of instruction for student advancement in literacy. Literacy coach working with ENL teacher to better teach, assess. and monitor ENL student progress in literacy. Dedicated time during weekly faculty gathering to allow ENL teachers to help plan instruction for ELLs with content teachers. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT used as a baseline assessment and also consider as an overall measure of proficiency movement and identifiers of areas of need. Scrantron Performance Series Reading test used as baseline/benchmark assessment to measure progress and identify areas of need. Performance-based Assessment Tasks, (PBATS) are used as commencement qualification assessment in all content areas. (Mastery of learning standards assessed and used as indication of proficiency level acquired ) Gateways and student round tables used as promotion requirement for 9th and 10th graders. (Mastery of learning standards assessed and used as indication of proficiency level) acquired) 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Grade teams conduct student talk and planning to address identified needs Academic support is provided during advisory and after school office hours to address interventions needed Supplemental Title lll program is designed to support English language acquisition and literacy as needed pursuant the summative data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Outcome assessments used to evaluate and inform ELL programs ar NYSELAT, ELA Regents and Performance-Based Assessment Tasks, (PBAT) , and Math PBAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Ell related PD and data review in grade teams. Part IV: ELL Programming 2  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for ELLs is delivered in heterogeneous free standing ENL classes where students of mixed proficiency levels receive instruction by a licensed ENL teacher. In these heterogeneous free standing ENL classes, students receive leveled reading to enhance their language development. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All students are carefully programmed to be certain they have the mandated number of ENL and ELA instructional minutes each year with Entering ELLs getting a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL/ELA per week, Emerging ELLs 360 minutes of ENL/ELA per week, Transitioning and Expanding ELLs 180 minutes of ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of ENL/ELA per week for Commanding ELLs. In addition, the content area teachers are trained in language development and ENL methodologies. All information entered into STARS. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All students take math, science, social studies, and ENL and/or English every year. The medium of instruction is English, but the students are encouraged to use their native language to access content. Materials such as bilingual dictionaries and resource are available in students’ native languages. Students complete two Gateways each semester to ensure that students have attained mastery in content and skill. Teachers use clearly defined learning objectives for each lesson which are shared with students in order to provide a focus for purposeful teaching and learning. Language objectives include targeted key vocabulary, language structures, forms and function. BLS teachers promote literacy across the curriculum and there is an intentional focus on content literacy in all classrooms. As the basis for instruction, teachers explicitly link concepts to students' backgrounds and experiences. Teachers help students make conscious links between their experiences and content of the classroom. Teachers model instructional conversations that provides oral language practice for ELLs and help deepen students' conceptual frameworks for comprehension. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are supported in their NL throughout the year with texts and technology. ELLs are allowed to complete their Gateways, project based assessments, in their NL for courses other than English and ESL. The ESL teacher works closely with the school librarian who collaborates with the New York Public Library to ensure students have access to texts and resources in their NL and in English appropriate for their current reading level. Students are evaluated in their target language, English, throughout the year with the Performance Series Diagnostic Assessments and Gateways in all courses. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 3  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. Interventions for SIFE students include daily ENL instruction. During ENL class students are focused on spelling, word study, phonics, vocabulary building, reading comprehension, and independent writing. During vocabulary building, ESL teachers are focused on words that ELLs need for everyday speech, challenging words needed to access cognitively-demanding content, discipline- specific academic words for social studies, science and math concepts. In ELA daily teaching and assessment include phonemic awareness and phonics, explicit vocabulary instruction and practice, content-area reading for fluency and comprehension, writing and ongoing assessment. In all classes, teachers emphasize metacognitive strategies such as making connections from one content area to another. Math and science are taught as an integrated course as applied mathematics utilizing Physics to apply math concepts. Across the curriculum teachers use methods that help students determine importance of materials presented (what to attend to; how to prioritize information), help studens practice inference and use graphic aids as a way to help students synthesize material. Technology is used in English and ENL as a way to help students edit and review their writing. All students particpate in Saturday academic programs in math or English in preparation for the Regents exams. Students study visual arts or music that allow students creative expression in English. All students participate in Advisory each day fo character development, social emotional support and academic counseling. In Advisory, students review their transcripts to analyze academic performance by calculating their GPA and ensuring that they have taken all required classes needed for graudation. Students engage in Sustained Silent Reading for one hour a week, as well as preparation for college through a College Awareness curriculum that focuses on financial, academic and social-emotional components of the college experience. b. ELLs with less than three years in US schools are enrolled in ENL classes according to their results of the NYSITELL or the NYSESLAT. All students are enrolled in core courses with speakers of the targent laguage to facilitate acquisition through immersion. The Advisory system and smaller ENL classes provide support as newcommers acclimate to BLS and New York. The ENL teacher provides support in all core subjects in the high frequency, native langauge of Spanish. c. Students receiving services four to six years are enrolled in full mainstream courses in addition to a sheltered instruction class in content literacy with the ENL teacher. Students are also receiving academic counseling from the Guidance Counselor and their Advisors, while content area teachers offer Office Hours to provide additional support. d. Students who are long-term ELLs take all the core content classes in addition to a sheltered instruction class in content literacy with the ESL teacher. Students are also receiving academic counseling from the Guidance Counselor and their Advisors, while content area teachers offer Office Hours to provide additional support. e. Formers ELLS receive additional 90 min/week instruction through content area 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies used in the classroom for ELL-SWD include: Targeted content vocabulary and language. Instruction is designed to integrate language and content Scaffolding through appropriate use of graphic organizers, visual aids, peer to peer help or home language assistance through peer help or technological assistance. Scaffolds to help ELL-SWD connect prior knowledge and experience with new information. Collaborative group work through purposeful groupings . Groupings are developed to best support the learning needs of the ELL-SWD. 4  Inquiry-based learning to best support student choice, interest, and engagement. Also to provide varied access points for ELL-SWDs. Student to student talk and small group talk. for ELL-SWD to have extended time with language usage and acquisition and peer to peer learning and support. Materials used for the instructional strategies outlined above include, LCD projectors, iPads and Apps, laptops, digital dictionaries and thesauruses. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Data is gathered by our IEP team and together with parent, student and teachers of the student a plan is developed to provide special education services in the least restrictive environment. The ESL teachers collaborate with the the Learning Support/Special Education Department and English Department to ensure the continuous communication of mandates, services and needs of all ELLs with IEPs. The ESL teacher collaborates with these departments and meets with teachers to share strategies to meet the unique needs for ELL-SWDs with cognitive delays in the least restrictive environment. ELLs with IEPs are enrolled in a content literacy class with the ESL teacher to provide a comprehensive support program in order to ensure academic success. The Learning Support /Special Education Department works with the programmer and the ESL teacher to create flexible scheduling to ensure every ELL with an IEP is offered the services s/he needs for every area in the least restrictive environment. The variety in programming allows all ELLs with disabilities to enroll in the required courses they need to attain a NYS high school diploma. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for Newcomer, Developing and Long Term ELLs are focused on improving the literacy skills and ELA Common Core test performance of all students, ELLs are a priority sub-population given the challenge of acquiring content knowledge in the target language. Services are offered in English during the day, embedded into students' individual programs. After school homework and project assistance is provided in Spanish with the ESL teachers and in English with the Learning Support Team and content area teachers. ELLs are provided extra supports by ESL teachers in preparation for PBATS in all content areas. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have revised our Supplemental Title lll program so that it is more engaging for our students and best utilizes best practices in language acquisition. We have developed a storytelling program that will invite students and their parents to brainstorm ideas, pre-write, write and edit personal stories for publication and oral delivery. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never had a bilingual program. 5  11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Teachers work in teams made up of the content area specialist, Special Education teachers and the ENL teachers to provide instruction through the day. Title lll AM and PM enrichment programs are offered to supplement instruction. through tutoring and content specific supports. ELLs are not restricted by their programming. They are eligible to access all classes, including Internships, College Readiness and Honors classes, and also are invited to participate in campus-wide after-school programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials used to enhance learning for ELLs include the following: LCD projectors used for all levels in core content areas to provide visuals and text to support instruction and research iPads/laptops- used for all levels in core content areas to access APPS/sites to assist with language acquisition and for translation into home language. Document cameras used for all levels in core content areas to model performance tasks live while ELL students are listening to directions and /or new instruction. Audio books used to support literacy instruction in ELA classroom as needed. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In content area classes, students are encouraged to use their native language and use the bilingual materials, such as dictionaries and glossaries to support learning content. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All courses, interventions and after school enrichment programs are age and grade appropriate. We use a wide array of resources in our school including teacher-made materials, trade books at many reading levels, and a variety of non-text, hands-on materials. In addition, our school has wireless access in all classrooms and students use the Internet to access resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? In order to utilize shared space more efficiently, schools pair up to administer parts of NYSESLAT. ENL teachers and TESOL coordinators consult as needed to learn best practices in compliance tasks and testing coordination. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have new student orientation both in late August. New students attend a three day bridge class to familiarize themselves with school rules and customs. In addition we also have Advisory classes which provide students more personalized academic and social emotional support. The new students are paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. Elective classes are offered to all students on a first come, first served basis. ELLs at BLS have access to all programs in the school. They have the choice of selecting their after school clubs and programs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish as a Foreign Language is made available to students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? 6  d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Every Wednesday afternoon, Bronx Lab faculty receives Professional Development in. All teachers are trained in the use of effective instructional strategies to provide support for all students, as well as intervention and support strategies for ELLs and Students with disabilities in mainstream classrooms. Teachers learn instructional practices that help make content more accessible and comprehensible for ELLs. Teachers share practices and resources that have proved effective in teaching Ells and ELLs with IEPs. The ESL teachers participate in the Wednesday Afternoon Professional Development sessions which include: developing and implementing mastery-based grading, utilizing Understanding by Design, teaching Habits of Mind for critical thinking, designing inquiry-based and student-centered instruction and project based assessments. The ESL teachers meets monthly with Orville Ingram, Assistant Principal, to further develop these areas of training with a specific focus on creating curriculum and learning opportunities for ELLs. Non-pedagogic staff will be surveyed in the fall to assess needs in assisting ELLs in our school. Professional development will be developed pursuant the needs assessment. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school provides ELL-Specific professional professional development for all teachers-15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for ENL teachers pursuant CR Part 154.2 during our Wednesday afternoon faculty gathering professional development sessions. Agenda is provided with attendance sheet to be signed by attendees. These documents are filed in the office of the Assistant Principal. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 7  One individual meeting is held in February with the parents of ELLS to discuss student progress, and post secondary transitions. Said meetings are had with an ENL teacher and in the preferred home language. Language assistance/translation is provided for each of these meetings. Digital log is used to keep an account of meetings held as well as attempts to schedule said meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. The parents of English Language Learner students will be invited to take part in our new pioneer project called Kitchen Stories.on Monday afternoons, from 3-4pm. The intention of the program is to enrich the English language usage in all four modalities: reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Students in all levels and grades will attend, and their parents will be invited to select sessions to join in story brainstorming, and telling, the sharing and write up of family recipes and the final celebration with food, story telling and the release of published Kitchen Stories book. The families of the students will be encouraged to participate and attend the entire program if possible. The program will be known to the students and families as Monday Café. Special meetings will be had with parents of ELLS during the November Parent Teacher Conferences in their preferred language. At said meeting parents will be informed of our instructional program for ELLs, learning standards for each content area, assessments administered throughout the year, and overall school expectations. To increase ELL parent involvement we will conduct a survey to best identify needs and develop ELL Parent workshops to address those needs. Three Parent workshops will be developed and offered Throughout the school year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Sarah Marcy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Lab School School DBN: 11x265 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Sarah Marcy Title Principal Nilda Dontaine Assistant Principal Letys Mejias Parent Coordinator Amanda Tobier ENL/Bilingual Teacher Carol Notice Parent Gina Machado Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Christine Bernard Jacob Prairie Coach Coach LisaPietrangolare School Counselor Kathy Pelles David Walsh Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Serena Paredes Other Related Service Prov Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/11/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 9/14/15 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X265 School Name: BRONX LAB HIGH SCHOOL Superintendent: KathyRehfield-P The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this n/a Letys) Amanda n/a n/a Mejias Tobier n/a conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No n/a Parent Coordinator ENL teacher and TESOL Coordinator n/a n/a Yes Yes n/a n/a No Yes n/a * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To gather data and assess language preferences of parents we use Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS reports, Student Emergency Cards and surveys conducted in February and June. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Albanian Arabic Bengali Chinese French Fulani Haitian Creole Hausa 404 240 6 5 6 1 4 1 2 1 Indonesian (aka Bahasa) 0 Mandinka (aka Mandingo) Slovak (American) Sign Language Twi 0 0 0 1 60.21 35.77 0.89 0.75 0.89 0.15 0.6 0.15 0.3 0.15 0 0 0 0 0.15 409 234 6 3 6 1 4 0 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 60.95 34.87 0.89 0,45 0.89 0.15 0.6 0 0.3 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Welcome Letter School Policies and Calendar Aug Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Spanish-language translation is done by bi-lingual staff and DOE T&I is utilized for translation into other covered languages, using transition vendor and/or school-based staff for 2  Curriculum Night Parent-Teacher Conferences- Sept./ Nov/ March/ May Parent Teacher Association Meetings Sept.-June non- covered languages. Also ,DOE provided templates used when appropriate. Spanish-language translation is done by bi-lingual staff and DOE T&I is utilized for translation into other covered languages, using transition vendor and/or school-based staff for non- covered languages. Spanish-language translation is done by bi-lingual staff and DOE T&I is utilized for translation into other covered languages, using transition vendor and/or school-based staff for non- covered languages. Montefiore Health Sept. Montefiore forms in varied languages Clinic Application Performance -based Assessment Tasks letter and ELA Regents Jan. and June IEP Meeting Notice and PWN Sept-June Attendance Letters Sept-June Promotion in Doubt Letters February, May Spanish-language translation is done by bi-lingual staff and DOE T&I is utilized for translation into other covered languages, using transition vendor and/or school-based staff for non- covered languages. Templates in SESIS and using transition vendor and/or school-based staff for non- covered languages. Spanish-language translation is done by bi-lingual staff and DOE T&I is utilized for translation into other covered languages, using transition vendor and/or school-based staff for non- covered languages. DOE Intranet templates and transition vendor and/or school-based staff for non- covered languages. 3  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Summer- bridge Program for incoming 9th grade class Aug Parent Teacher Conferences Sept./Nov/March/May IEP Meetings Ongoing throughout the school year PTA meetings SLT meetings Sept-June Sept-June provide interpretation service(s)? Bilingual staff and interpreters from vendor agency Bilingual staff and over-the-phone interpretation service Bilingual members of the IEP Team and over-the-phone interpretation service Bilingual staff and interpreters from vendor agency Bilingual staff and interpreters from vendor agency 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Utilizing Family Worker, Parent Coordinator, and other bilingual staff. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Link to the regulation is provided to all teachers in September and again in February. At the beginning of the school year the RCPL is shared with TESOL coordinator, parent coordinator, and family worker, In September a modified version of RCPL is shared with full staff in order for community to be aware of languages our families speak and prefer. Contact information for DOE T&I Unit for translation into covered languages and translation vendor for translation into non-covered languages is provided to entire community in September. Our LAC and AP oversee the translation and interpretation of information and assess how resources are being used by staff. PD on use of resources is provided to full staff in September and in February. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 4   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We use translated signage, multilingual Welcome Poster, Language ID Cards and 'I Speak _______ Cards" Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our Parent Coordinator routinely inquires from parents about their language assistance experience. Parents are surveyed in February and in June . 5 
