 11X270 School Name: ACADEMY FOR SCHOLARSHIP AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP: A COLLEGE BOARD SCHOOL Principal: ZENOBIA WHITE     Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Academy For Scholarship and Entrepreneurship 321100011270 9-12 School Number (DBN): 11 X 270 921 East 228 th Street, Bronx, NY 10466 718-696-3840 718-696-3841 Phone Number: Fax: Zenobia White-DaCruz Zwhite2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Zenobia White-DaCruz Arlene Whiteman Ms. Nicole Hurd ZenobiaWhite-DaCruz SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Elaine Gibson Joel Mckenzie JheanelleLevy TawanaButler Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza CStaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 917-608-0230 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TawanaButler/ CBO/Staff CBO Representative, if applicable Gracia Richards/UFT Member KallicharanBalkaran/ UFT Treasurer/Teacher Secretary/ Teacher  Name ZenobiaWhite-DaCruz Arlene Whiteman NicoleHurd Linda Richardson Elaine Gibson Joel McKencie JheanelleLevy *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools)  Name Gillian Brown / Parent Angelica Felix/ Parent Carol Salese/ Parent Venice Brown, / Parent n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member Member Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? ● The mission of the Academy for Scholarship and Entrepreneurship is to combine rigorous college and academic program with a world-class business curriculum that unleashes the talents and potentials of all scholars. We are a small school with 368 students of which 22% are special needs students and 5% are English Language Learners students. 0  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. All members of the Academy for Scholarship and Entrepreneurship are dedicated to ensuring the success of all our scholars in college and beyond. We have 2 CTE approved program- Virtural Enterprise and Marketing and we have partnered with various for profit and non- for -profit organizations: Future and Options, TOPS, North Bronx National Councils of Negro Women,. Councilman Andy King and Jade Multi-family Circle Center. We also have partnerships with various Institutions of Higher Education, Mercy College, Monroe College, and Farmingdale. Other agencies we are currently partnering with in support of our students academic and social -emotional development: , Aim High Male and Female Initiative, Advancement Via Individual Determination (AVID)., Peer Group Connections (PGC), and Learning Educational Solutions. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have a diverse population of learners: 22% off our student populations are receiving special services. 5% of our students are English Language Learners. Out of this number 32.1% of the students are long term ELLS. We find that 21.4% of our ELL's are under credited based on their age. However 28.6% of ELL's have been held over in the past three years. Therefore, our ELL's are at risk and in need of academic services and intervention. 22% of our students population are receiving special education services. This includes ICT core classes, mandated counseling, speech, occupational therapy, self-contain classes, and SETTS. Special Needs students are passing classes and graduating at a lower rate than the general education students. We are effort based school and we strongly believe that all children can learn and learn at a high level. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. ● We are proud of the following 2017/18 accomplishments: - effective September 2015 we were designated as an approved CTE program we have the following programs_ Virtual Enterprise and marketing. 23 of our graduating seniors received the CTE endorsement last year. As part of that certification process we are continuing our relationship with Farmingdale College, Added Mercy College and Expanded our partnership with Monroe College to include an on-site Marketing Course taught by a Monroe Professors. This will also help us promote Career Readiness by offering additional in-house college business credit opportunities for our students. - 79% of our students graduated. An increase from last year where only 64% of our students graduated. . - we have further defined our curricula across all contents areas to ensure that all students including Special Needs and English Language Learners consistently have access to rigorous and cognitively engaging learning tasks; we are placing an increased emphasis on Literacy strategies across all subject areas that incorporate Close Reading and Citing Textual Evidence. 1  - we were concerned by our overall low passing rates in grades 9-11 - we rated average or above average in all five of the six areas of the Framework for Great Schools. This is consistent with last environmental survey results. The focus continue to be on creating a supportive environment. The key areas of focus for this year are: - to improve our overall passing rate in grades 9-11 by 3% by June 2019 - to increase the number of college acceptance by 3% by June 2019 - to increase the percentage of parents that attend the parents meeting by 5% by June 2019. - to increase the number of students with a 90% or above attendance rate by 5% by June 2019 - to Increase the number of teachers rated highly effective in domain 3c-Engagement by 5% by June 2019. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X270 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 377 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 12 13 11 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 30 19 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 79.0% % Attendance Rate 76.1% % Reduced Lunch 7.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 31.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 13.25 0% 4% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 67% 47% 59.4% 1.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 114 113 7 81.4% 2.7% 24.1% 62.3% 2.7% 1.9% 4 37% 7.5 N/A N/A 68% 66% 85.3% 10% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Our area of strength insofar as leaders and teachers ensure that teacher collaborate within and across grades and subject on a weekly basis which enables all students (English Language Learner and Special Needs) to access robust curriculum that incorporates literacy and college and career readiness.  Our area of focus is 1.1 Pedagogy. The development of more complex curriculum that stimulates higher order thinking and deep conceptual understanding is something that our school community needs to strengthen, as evidenced by the following recommendation from our SY 2017-18 PPO and Quality Report.. o Across classrooms teaching strategies are aligned to the CCLS school wide instructional expectation and teachers are integrating the instructional shifts into daily instruction. Student work products reflect high levels of thinking and participation with students being asked to read primary sources and draw conclusions from text and pictures etc. There is opportunity for more effective use of Co-teachers in ICT classes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will collaboratively develop academic expectations for grade levels 9 in order to improve the class pass rate as measured by a 3% increase in our 9th-11th grade classes pass rates. 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide Professional Development that focuses on literacy based strategies which incorporate higher order questions that ensure critical thinking and discussions. Provide common planning and/or curriculum development opportunities daily for all teachers. All teachers Parents will be invited to attend monthly teacher directed sessions based on the monthly professional development focus and/or students needs. All Parents All Teachers October, 2018 - May 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 October 15, 2018 - May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Literacy Team and PD Team Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator, Subject Lead Teachers Additional data analysis will be conducted for Special Needs and ELLS students and other high need students subgroups and Additional support will be provided as needed (Additional small group instruction, and other academic intervention as dictated by student needs) Special Education, and ELL Teachers November 2018 - May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, SIT Team, ELL Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be invited to monthly PTA meetings where the Parent Coordinator, PTA Officers, Counselors, Teachers and Principals will regularly share supports that the school have available to help their child's progress toward credit accumulation, college acceptance and ultimately graduation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Class coverages for teachers to participate in walk-throughs. (Tax Levy) 5 days/5-7 coverages per day  PM school to support our students in credit accumulation. (P/F Set-aside)  Teacher Per Session ( 2 Teachers/ 12 weeks/ 24 days/ 96 hrs)  Admin Per Session (1 Administrator/12 weeks/24 days/ 48 hrs)  Secretary Per Session ( 1 Administrative Assistant/24 days 48 hrs) 5  Saturday Academy in order to help students to review for the Regents exams. (P/F Set-aside)  Guidance Counselor Per session (1 Guidance Counselor/ 4 weeks/4 days/ 4 hrs)   Teacher Per Session (5 Teachers/8 weeks/ 8 days/ 70 hrs)  Admin Per Session (1 Administrator/8 weeks/ 8 days/ 24 hrs)  Guidance Counselor Per session (1 Guidance Counselor/2 weeks/2 days/4 hrs)  Payment of yearly contract with Atlas Rubicon in order to upload all unit plans. (Tax Levy)' Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will collaboratively develop academic expectations for grade levels 9-11 in order to improve the overall 9-11 grade class pass rates as measured by 3% increase of the 9-11 grade students' pass rates. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Progress reports, Report cards and school-wide Scholarship reports to assess students' class pass rate. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  Our area of strength for this area; insofar as our school cultivates the development of systems and partnerships that support and sustain social and emotional developmental health. We have hired a social worker this year and we have partnered with Aim High and Educational Learning Solutions in order to provide after school programs for students an outlets for their social and emotional developmental needs and we hold ongoing grade meetings in order to discuss the needs of our students to ensure their success. Additionally, we have two guidance counselors, 2 part time, college advisors and an in school clinic that takes mental health referrals.  Our area of focus -Continue to engage a diverse range of stakeholders as part of the school’s plan to continue to promote a career and college readiness culture that promotes positive supportive relationships, accountability, preparedness, effort and respect. We will continue to collect, analyze, and use a wide variety of data to address student academic, social and emotional developmental health needs. The school is committed to developing a system by which school leaders and staff collaborate utilizing school data in order to respond to students’ social and emotional developmental health needs to ensure their overall success. As part of our efforts to improve ours systems, we will engage the following identified areas for improvement:  Revamp the advisory curriculum to assure alignment with the career and college going culture initiatives  Conduct on-going Staff Professional Development that prepare teachers to effectively implement the initiatives.  Have weekly school wide child study teams though our grade team meetings to identify students that are at risk within each grade level.  Continue to develop a referral system that will hold our community accountable to support those students requiring social emotional support Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 7  By June 2019, the college access team members will collaboratively revamp the advisory curriculum and format to improve the number of student acceptances to college by 3% from 46% to 49%. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our PD Team and Access to College Team will develop Professional Development for the Staff that encourages a career and college going culture which promotes positive supportive relationships, accountability, preparedness, effort and respect. The teams will also ensure that the advisory curriculum for all grades reflect the career and college going culture initiative. AT Risk Girls November 2018- May 2019 Assistant Principal, LES Social Wotkers and Guidance Counselors AIM High Empowerment consultants will provide mentors for our at risks males and females with a focus on proactively addressing social emotional and other behavioral issues and reinforcing Character, Attitude , Respect and Effort. At Risk Boys November 2018-May 2019 Assistant Principal, AIM High Mentors and Guidance Counselors Learning Educational Solutions, Alchemy and ASE Teachers will provide after-school Enrichment opportunities to all eligible students. All Students September 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, LES Director Restorative Justice Team will partner with the parents and external entities to create a school-wide behavioral Intervention System that will proactively address students negative behavioral issues. All At Risk Students November 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal, Restorative Justice Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. By June 2019, in order to develop a more supportive and collaborative role with families the school will increase communication with families resulting in a 5% increase in the number of parents attending parents meetings from 5% to 10%. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9   Per session for evening meetings to ensure the participation of pertinent staff members in parent meetings. (P/F Set-aside  Teacher Per Session (10 teachers/5 weeks/ 5 days/ 100hrs)  Admin Per Session (1 Administrator /5 weeks/5 days/ 10hrs)  Guidance Counselor Per session (1 Guidance Counselor/5 weeks/ 5 days/ 10hrs)  Schedule time within the schedule to hold grade meetings in order to engage staff members in addressing the needs for at risk student across all subject areas.  Purchase our contract for the use of Skedula so teachers can keep anecdotal records of student performance. (Tax Levy)  Hire Aim High to support our At-Risk Males Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 , we will see a 3% increase in the number of parents attending our parent outreach sessions.. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Parent Meetings Attendance Sheets Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  The mission of the Academy for Scholarship and Entrepreneurship is to combine rigorous college and academic program with a world-class business curriculum that unleashes the talents and potentials of all scholars.  We are encouraged by the our new CTE program designation, partnerships formed with Monroe College and Farmingdale College and the expansion of our STEM, in-house College Courses, and Advance Placement course offerings which will help us promote career and college readiness for all our students.  We are particularly proud of the increase in our 4 year graduation rate. Although our college readiness index increased last year we would like to see an even greater improvement this year. We are continuing to further defined our curricula across all contents areas to ensure that all students consistently have access to rigorous and cognitively engaging learning tasks; we are placing an increase emphasis on literacy strategies across all subjects and grades that create differentiated entry points and quality support for a diversity of learners; and teachers are using strategies to check for understanding and using rubrics to support students with peer and self-assessment. The key areas of focus for this year are to continue to refine our curriculum with an emphasis on an effective school-wide interim assessment plan and implementing literacy strategies across all grades and subject emphasizing: close reading and citing textual evidence as means to improving our overall passing rate. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the college access team members will collaboratively revamp the advisory curriculum and format to improve the number of student acceptance to college by 3% from 46% to 49%.. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct Professional Development that focus on developing a college going culture and growth mindset. All Teachers Fall 2018-June 2019 Principal and Professional Development (PD) Team and College Access Team Develop a specialized advisory curriculum for all subjects and grades that is aligned to the College Access 9-12 Student College Preparation Checklist and our Restorative Justice Practices. All Students Fall 2018-May 2019 Principal, College Access Team n/a - - - Provide small group support for our special needs students, ELLS and general education At-Risk students. Special Education students November 2018-June 2019 Principal And Assistant Principal, Special Education Teachers, Social Workers, College Advisors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will hold parent meetings in order to discuss graduation requirements, college readiness, and curriculum. In this way we can support the parents by empowering them with the information that their children need in order to ensure success. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Class coverage for teachers to participate in walk-throughs. (Tax Levy) 5 days/5-7 coverage per day  PM school to support our students in credit accumulation. (P/F Set-aside)  Teacher Per Session ( 2 Teachers/ 12 weeks/ 24 days/ 96 hrs) 2  Saturday Academy in order to help students to review for the Regents exams. (P/F Set-aside)  Admin Per Session (1 Administrator/12 weeks/24 days/ 48 hrs)  Guidance Counselor Per session (1 Guidance Counselor/ 4 weeks/4 days/ 4 hrs)   Teacher Per Session (5 Teachers/8 weeks/ 8 days/ 70 hrs)  Admin Per Session (1 Administrator/8 weeks/ 8 days/ 24 hrs)  Guidance Counselor Per session (1 Guidance Counselor/2 weeks/2 days/4 hrs)  Payment of yearly contract with Atlas Rubicon in order to upload all unit plans. (Tax Levy)  External Teacher Professional Development for Lead Instructional Teachers (Math and Global History) and Administrators Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 75% of the students would have completed at least 2 college applications. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We are utilzing the Naviance System and we have the support of the College Access for all program to hold students accountable for their college applications. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A careful review of our Advance data revealed that 3 of our teachers received an overall HEDI ratiing of Highly.Effective 1 teacher was rated - ineffective. All the other teachers received Effective Ratings with domains 3c Engagement and 3d assessment receiving the lowest overall average ratings. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school leaders and professional development team will implement a professional development plan that builds teachers' capacity to engage students at a highly Effective level resulting in a 5% increase in the teachers improving one performance level in component 3c. Engagement. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Provide Highly Effective Professional Development that addresses best practices in each of the Danielson components with a focus on 3c-Engagement Provide feedback that incorporate specific recommendations to support the movement from "Effective" to "Highly Effective" in all Danielson components Feedback will be timely, frequent and varied (different constituencies) . It will include but not be limited to: Peer inter-visitation, student feedback and informal and formal observations. The feedback will be aligned with our Professional Development and Literacy Plans and, CEP Goals (were applicable) . 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018- May 2019 October 2018- May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal All teachers Teachers that are Effective or higher in all domains All Teachers October 2018 May 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, and All Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Administrative Team and the Parent Coordinator will implement and provide oversight of all activities planned to engage families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and Strategies. We will provide monthly seminars and other activities, we will revamp the parent room to make it more welcoming and resourceful, we will implement a thorough parent outreach plan, using the entire learning community. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Hiring o5  f outside consultant for curriculum development with a focus o6   n parent engagement. Schedule targeted Professional Develop7  ment for our Parent Coordinator  Offer Training Rate for all tea8  chers that attend additional Professional Development in par9 ent engagement. i Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 2.5 % of the staff will have Highly Effective. Ratings in 3c Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We utilize the Advance system. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our area of strengths is that our school community fosters a feeling of belonging and trust, which would encourage families to freely and frequently engage with the school. We also engage in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that students’ strength and needs are identified.  Our areas of focus for Tenet 6 are SOPs 6.2 & 6.5. Feedback from the school’s QR recommended that the school continue to: o seek out opportunities to foster conversations with students and families regarding creating a support environment for students.  Additionally, there are steps the school needs to take to support our families with their understanding and use of data. In doing so, the school will be promoting dialogue between parents, students and school constituents centered on supporting students.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will implement a school-wide attendance program and supportive and restorative practices which will improve our school's environment for students as measured by a 5% increase in the number of students with 90% or above attendance rate. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop an in-house partnership with Monroe College whereby Monroe Professors will teach College level STEM courses at the school and ensure that parents are made aware of these opportunities through newsletters, phone calls and regular targeted parent meetings. STEM Students Parents October 2018- June 2019 CTE Teacher, Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator Identify at least 3 more profit-based businesses and 3 more non-profit based businesses for our internship opportunities offering using the High School Job Opportunities listing, Community Advisory Council (CAC ) -Committee Members and Administrators referrals and ensure that parents are made aware of these opportunities through newsletters, phone calls and regular targeted parent meetings. Encourage students to take SAT Prep Courses and retake exams in order to meet the college readiness minimum of 75% for Integrated Algebra and 75% for English Language Arts.and ensure that parents are made aware of these opportunities through newsletters, phone calls and regular targeted parent meetings. 11th and 12th Grade Students September 2018- June 2019 Parents 11th and 12th grade Students November 2018 - June 2019 Parents CAC Committee Chair-person, Principal, Assistant Principal, Work Base Learning Coordinator, and Parent Coordinator College Advisors, Math and English Teachers, Assistant Principal, Principal and Parent Coordinator Provide Training in Restorative Justice Practices for the all Staff All Staff- 3b – Parent and Family Engagement October 2018- June 2019 Restorative Justice coordinator If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Aim HIgh - Male and Femaie empowerment Education Learning Solutions Morris Heights Clinic Educational Alchemy- Theatre Program 2  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teacher Per Session (3 teachers/ 3 weeks/ 3 days/ 18 hrs. 3   Admin Per Session ( 1 Administrator /3 weeks/3 days/ 6 hrs)  Guid4  ance Counselor Per session 1 Guidance Counselor/3 weeks/3day5  s/6hrs)  Purchase of incentives based on the needs of the commun6 ity. (P/F Set-aside) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will increase the number of scholars with 90% attendance by 5%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. attendance tracking system Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Results from the ELA Regents and class grades Results from the Algebra 1 Regents and class grades Results from the Living Environment and Earth Science Regents and class grades Results from the Global and US Regents and class grades Referral by teachers or dean Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) THINKCercaSystem Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and One on- one During the school day Tutorial Small Group After-School Regents Prep Small Group After-School Regents Prep Small Group After School Counseling One-on-one and small groups Clinic, I' Raise and BRAG during the school day 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 44 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Uniforms, School Supplies, enrichment activities, personal items, additional counseling, outside resources as needed Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Through a school-wide collaborative effort we have created a professional development program that supports the school’s instructional needs based on the information provided by the data of the Quality Review, DYOs, Regents Item Analysis, Learning Environment Survey and Report Card. This campus collaboration also includes an ongoing system of inter-visitations. Our school also has hired the services of educational consultants to provide instructional support for our teachers in the following areas: Literacy, special Ed and English language learners. Our teachers meet daily for common planning and/or curriculum development , bi weekly in Departments as well as grade teams.an we conduct 45 minutes professional development session once a week. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). New and non-tenured teachers are supported by state-required mentoring, professional development to meet required new teacher PD hours for state licensing, and our connections and programs affiliated with local college and universities (so they can earn required credits for certification). Veteran teachers are offered leadership opportunities and programs to support their continued growth within the school, and have a voice in school leadership through school-wide positions and as part of the SLT team. All staff will participate in ongoing Professional Development activities both within and outside of the school building. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 1  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams with designated leaders review educational research to determine appropriate assessment measures for each content area as well as the Common Core Learning Standards. Rubrics from CCLS-rich sites such as Engage NY are adapted and utilized to meet the needs of our mostly ELL population. Formative assessment measures are reviewed, adapted, and tested in the classrooms and teacher teams analyze the outcomes for their next steps. Professional development is an outgrowth of the teachers’ surveys, observation data, and identified student needs. Instruction and assessment go hand-in-hand and we spend considerable time in our professional development to ensure that are assessments are measuring what we are teaching in the classrooms, content, skills, and process. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) 2  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 242,829.00 0 0 0 2,,203,751.00 x x 5A 5B, 5C, 5D 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-3  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Academy for Scholarship and Entrepreneurship , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Academy for Scholarship and Entrepreneurship will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 6  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Academy for Scholarship and Entrepreneurship,in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of 7  student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 9  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 0  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Acad. for Scholarship & Entrepreneurship Borough Bronx School Number 270 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Zenobia White-DaCruz Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Tiffany Gentry Teacher/Subject Area Tiffany Gentry /ENL Teacher/Subject Area Nichole Campbell/ Science Related-Service Provider Gracia Richards/ Special Educa Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Rufina Belthrop Coach type here School Counselor Donovan Salmon & Mercy Kurian Parent Parent Coordinator Yvonne Elliot-Barham Field Support Center Staff Member Pierre Wladin Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 359 Total number of ELLs 25 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.96% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used to assess the literacy levels of the ELLs are the NYSESLAT, NYSITELL. . There are also baseline assessments that are completed in their ESL and content area classes. In addition, Ell students who are not emerging take interim assessments with the rest of the school. The staff analyzes the data by itemizing it. Through itemizing of the data the staff gains insight to students' levels and skills. Thus, we are able to see what areas and skills the students excel and struggle in. Recent data from the NYSESLAT displays that our students tend to do better with the speaking and listening modalities. They also struggle with reading and writing modalities. The data derived from the baselines and NYSESLAT has informed instruction by which we have decided to work on close reading, argumentative writing and inferencing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3  The ENL teacher is available during 7th period for students who need additional support. The teacher also teaches 9th period. This allows students to obtain support after the school day as needed. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of the ENL program is determined by several factors. One determiner of success is students gaining proficiency and fluency in English, which in turn helps their academic pursuits in content areas classes. Another is successfully passing state exams such as the Regents Exam. A final marker of success is gaining full proficiency and testing out of ESL via the NYSLAT. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The ENL teacher and subject teachers are available 7th and 9th period to provide intervention. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The ENL teacher meets with the subject teacher to determine intervention strategies. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The insights provided by this data shows that the vast majority of students do better in the speaking and listening modalities than the reading and writing modalities. This data informs the school’s instructional plan by having ENL classes concentrate heavily on improving literacy while still placing emphasis on listening and speaking proficiency. The data pattern across proficiency levels is that students do much better in the listening and speaking modalities than the reading and writing modalities. This is true of all grades and ability levels. This affects instructional decisions because the self-contained ESL classes concentrate much more heavily on reading and writing than listening and speaking. This means there is a greater emphasis on Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency over Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills. The 9th graders struggled with inferencing questions, main idea and discussing a text, (text analysis) and descriptions . This issue is a 9-12 th grade issue. As a result of these findings there is an instruction initiative to focus on these areas across the board. Thus, more close reading questions, lessons that entail inferencing question, teaching argumentative writing and supplying strategies to aid students in acquiring these skills. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher meets with pertinent subject teacher to develop strategies for interventions. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Further, entering students will be pulled-out for stand-alone ENL for 180 minutes per week, and emerging students will be pulled-out for stand-alone ENL 90 minutes per week. Expanding and commanding students will receive four periods of integrated ENL per week to further support their language development. Instruction is delivered via self-contained classes, which is scheduled according to grade level with heterogeneous abilities. The ENL teacher will also push-into English and Social Studies classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. 4  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL/ELA will be achieved through stand-alone and integrated ENL. All students will receive 180 minutes of ENL through whole group instruction. Entering and emerging students will receive an additional 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL, which will be done through small group instruction, which will total 360 minutes of ENL/ELA instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL instructors support literacy via the Teachers College curriculum. Additionally, ENL teachers plan thematic units around the New York State Scope and Sequence for science and social studies. Each unit has targeted language goals that are supported through specific language objectives, which guide students as they master the grammatical and lexical features of English. Moreover, units are also planned around Common Core Speaking, Writing, Reading, and Listening Standards and the New Language Progressions. In terms of instructional approaches, teachers use visuals, , scaffolds, thinking maps, and differentiation to meet the needs of students. ENL teachers also consults with the ESL State Standards when planning lessons and units. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We currently use the Spanish Lab-R to determine native language proficiency in Spanish. We also use informal assessments to monitor progress throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status When it comes to specialized instruction for SIFEs newcomers and long-term ELLs, each student’s needs are addressed on a case-by-case basis. As a result of our school's relatively few ELLs and single instructor, there isn’t the ability to program specialty classes for these groups. Instead, the benefit of extremely small class sizes allows individual feedback and differential instruction from teacher to student. While each class works collectively on similar assignments, the teacher can successfully differentiate nuances from teacher to student. While each class works collectively on similar assignments, the teacher can successfully differentiated the nuances of each student’s particular situation. In particular, long term ELLs are serviced with better knowledge of their linguistic strengths and weakness and with instruction tailored to their content area classes. a. SIFE- differentiated instruction per IEP with ample audio, visual and manipulatives. b. Newcomers- individual feedback, buddy system for native language support (if possible) plenty of audio, video, sentence starters, repetition, exemplars. c. 4-6 Year ELLs differentiation through instructor’s personal knowledge of student strengths and weaknesses based on multiple years experience with the same learners d. Long-Term ELLs-differentiation based on student data and instructors prior knowledge of student from years past All Ells receive extended testing in addition to those who have recently tested out. Those who have recently tested out are also entitled to 180mins of ESL instruction 5  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs use scaffolding instructional strategies in conjunction with each grade’s leveled textbooks and content-specific materials to provide access to academic content and development of fluency in English. Scaffolding strategies include but are not limited to graphic organizers, chucking, models/visuals, contact clues and vocabulary pre-teaching. In addition to the leveled textbooks and content specific materials, a leveled library is available to ELL-SWDs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To ensure that all ELL-SWDs receive mandated services, all service providers have access to the students' IEP. Special education teachers in ICT settings are able to be flexible to meet the needs of ELL-SWDs by using small group instruction throughout the day. This model of co-teaching allows for centers in which students access content and language at their level, which exemplifies flexibility in all areas. ENL teachers of ELL-SWDs are able to provide the least restrictive environment by not exceeding twelve students in small groups. Additionally, ELL-SWDs receive push-in and pull-out small group instruction so as to support them within the curriculum as well as for their specific needs. Overall, these students have already received Tier One and Tier Two interventions and as a result, ELL-SWDs receive small group / one-on-one instruction with a hands on approach to learning. In addition, there is an emphasis on visual and technical support (such as, SMART boards, document cameras, Learn pads, I-pads, and flip cameras. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted interventions for ELLs in ELA in the content areas include: Thinking Maps, Wilson Foundations, Fountas and Pinnell Lessons, Sounds in Motion, Reading Rescue, Reading Recovery, and ESL Brainpop. Based on multiple assessments, Response to Intervention Services (RTI) are provided to students who show a need for support in ELA and the content areas. These students are routinely given Great Leaps in ELA and in math. In addition, several ELLs attend a RTI after school program that is co-taught by an ENL and general education teacher. This afterschool program provides at-risk services to several struggling ELLs. Targeted interventions for Math, Science, and Social Studies takes place through small groups instruction to address specific needs in both language and content. Next year, we anticipate ENL teachers pushing-in not only during ELA instruction, but also during Math and Science instruction. These services will continue for two years after ELLs exit the program. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the upcoming school several improvements will be made to the programming at ASE. Overall, this will infuse more language support into classroom instruction and will assist the general education teacher in meeting the needs of the ELLs. Finally, ENL teachers will be able to attend grade level meetings to plan and to infuse more language support into all classrooms. Another affordance this change provides is smaller, more focused groups for entering and emerging ELLs who will receive additional instruction outside of class. This will also help ENL teachers to provide more focused support to ELL-SWD in smaller, more homogeneous groups. Other improvements include additional curriculum supports for ENL bilingual texts, and more. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Every ELL is afforded equal access to all school programs athletics and enrichment. In addition to the mandated ESL program, ELL students are mainstreamed in their other subject area classes such as science, social studies, art, math, gym/health, foreign language and business. ESL students who also qualify for Special Education programs are given services according to their IEP. In addition, all middle school Ells participate in the after school enrichment activities four times a week. After school services offered to ELLs include Title III after school tutoring for middle school, enrichment activities such as volleyball, art and crafts, sewing, technology, games, etc. All communication to parents of ELL are provided in English as well as in the student’s native language. 6  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We utilize a number of instructional supports and supplemental material in order to support language development. Beginning in the Spring of 2015, we have adopted "Thinking Maps", an instructional approach that utilizes 8 visual maps that each are aligned to a specific cognitive approach, such as sequencing or listing. Students then organize their thinking into the maps , within their notebooks or on chart paper. This process supports our students English language development in that they are making clear connections between the map and the cognitive language and tier 2 and 3 vocabulary aligned to their thinking. Additionally, the maps can be used for vocabulary development, text based evidence, metacognition, among others. Next, we utilize content based programs, such as Hot Topics and Seeds of Science to expand our students' experiences in social studies and science and to build their language development and exposure to academic vocabulary. Finally, we utilize ST Math or Jiji Math which is a mathematics program that uses visual means of exposing students to Common Core aligned math concepts. No language is required in order to be immersed in the program. As a result, regardless of the students' language proficiency level, they are exposed to the grade level standards in an engaging manner. Furthermore, we have numerous devices, such as iPads, Learn Pads, and computers so teachers can individualize the learning for each child using a number of different programs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENL teachers often use Google translator to assist with vocabulary support. ENL teachers support home language by discussing openly the transfers between English and the home languages either through cognates, similar grammatical structures, or similar phonemes. Moreover, the differences between the languages is also discussed so as to build metalinguistic awareness. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Upon enrollment, Ells are placed in the grade level appropriate to their age. If there is concern raised by the parent as well as the teacher of the student, a discussion is had with the administrative team to determine if the student should be placed in a different class. Regardless, Ells receive mandated services based on their proficiency level determined by the NYSITELL. The resources and services they receive during ENL and classroom instruction are grade level. Language is supported and scaffolded via ENL methodology so students can access grade level content. Bilingual support is provided when necessary. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? we utlize a number of instructional supports and supplemental material in order to support language development. Beginning in the Spring of 2015, we have adopted "Thinking Maps", an instructional approach that utlizes 8 visual maps that each are aligned to a specific cognitive approach, such as sequencing or listing. Students then organize their thinking into the maps , within their notebooks or on chart paper. This process supports our students English language development in that they are making clear connections between the map and the cognitive language and tier 2 and 3 vocabulary aligned to their thinking. Additionally, the maps can be used for vocabulary development, text based evidence, metacognition, among others. Next, we utilize content based programs, such as Hot Topics and Seeds of Science to expand our students' experiences in the social studies and science and to build their language development and exposure to academic vocabulary. Finally, we utilize ST Math or Jiji Math which is a mathematics program that uses visual means of exposing students to Common Core aligned math concepts. No language is required in order to be immersed in the program. As a result, regardelss of the students' language proficiency level, they are exposed to the grade level standards in an engaging manner. Furthermore, we have numerous devices, such as iPads, Learn Pads, and computers so teachers can individualize the learning for each child using a number of different programs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs and their parents meet with the ENL teachers and the parent coordinator at the beginning of the school year. Parents are welcomed and invited to all school wide workshops and extracurricular activities. 7  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The students are offered Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? There are several programs at our school that provide professional development to teachers to assist in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. All teachers of ELLs will continue to receive Thinking Maps professional development and coaching throughout the year, which is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Thinking Maps is an instructional tool used school wide to develop deeper thinking around content, and it is a school wide common language. As a result, teachers continue to be trained in using specific language that targets the eight ways our brain thinks. Teachers also participate in online learning modules and grade level professional learning communities to learn more about and to discuss successful implementation. Additionally, ENL teachers will be trained in a specific module that provides additional scaffolds and approaches for ELLs. Furthermore, all teachers will engage in professional development through TCRWP coaches. These sessions will include strategies for aligning ELL instruction with the Common Core Learning Standards as well as sharing and modeling best practices within professional learning communities. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL teachers work with parents and the guidance counselor to assist in the transition from elementary to middle school for ELLs. The guidance counselor holds parent workshops where parents can ask questions about this transition. Furthermore, students visit middle schools and get to view programs. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Each year the ENL teacher hosts a parent information session on the NYSESLAT exam. . During this parent information session, parents are informed of the dates of the upcoming exams and gain familiarity with the four sections that their children will encounter on the upcoming exam. This year ENL and bilingual teachers explained the changes to the exam and the new levels of proficiency that will be assessed on the exam. Parents are also given sample questions that students may use to practice. Parents are also invited every week to discuss their children's language development needs during Family Engagement. Finally the ENL teacher frequently contact parents individually by phone to discuss language development progress, using the DOE 8  Office of Translation services when necessary. Records are kept in a secure area in the ENL classroom. An attendance sheet for each ELL parent meeting is kept for our records, and copies of parent outreach letters are also kept securely in a binder in the ENL classroom. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator assists the ENL instructors with the compliance meetings for the parents of our ELL population. As previously noted, these take place at the beginning of the school year as well as throughout the year on a case by case basis. ELL families are invited to participate in regular meetings that happen Tuesday during parental involvement time. Furthermore, parents are invited to participate in classroom activities as well as shows and performances we host in the building. The parent association plays a key role in supporting the academic, social, and cultural areas that support the success of English Language Learners. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. No additional information. 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Zenobia White, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Academy for Scholarship and En School DBN: 11x270 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Zenobia White da Cruz Principal Dawn Harris Rose White Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Annette Colon ENL/Bilingual Teacher n/a Jon Krapin Parent Teacher/Subject Area Garcia Richards Teacher/Subject Area n/a n/a Coach Coach Donovan Salmon School Counselor Carron Staple n/a 6/1/17 n/a n/a Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Vladmir Pierre Other n/a Other n/a Other n/a 6/1/17 6/1/17 6/1/17 6/1/17 6/1/17 6/1/17 6/1/17 n/a n/a 6/1/17 6/1/17 N/a n/a n/a n/a 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x270 School Name: Academy for Scholarship and Entrep Superintendent: CarronStaples The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary)Yvonne Barham Parent Coordinator conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yes 4/23/2017 and 5/17/2017 Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to assess ASE’s written translation and oral interpretation needs is based on language preference of all our parents. Every parent's initial meeting is comprised of filling out the home language Identification survey (HLIS). The Home Language identification Survey also shows whether or not a child and his family speak English to a proficiency level high enough to understand school communications without translation. In addition, parents are able to indicate their language information on the Blue Card and Parent Survey which is distributed at the beginning of the academic school year. Data is also captured through the use of ATS reports (RESI, RMNR, RCPL,etc) and inputting data from ATS to the AMAO tool. By looking at various data points we area ble to assess the parents needs. With the assistance of our Parent Coordinator we are able to identify those parents who need written information in another language and assistance from interpreters, especially during the parent teacher conferences. 2  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral .21 .21 87.84 11.55 .21 1 1 426 57 1 .21 .21 87.84 11.75 .21 1 1 426 56 1 Arabic Bengali English Spanish American Sign Language Data As of 10/19/18 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish represents 11.55% Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Written translations services September Monthly Calendar Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School will print out pre translated documents from the intranet. We will use in-house staff who can assist with the translation of the documents. T & I unit will translate all general notices in covered languages. 3  Promotion in Doubt Letter January 2018 Regents Invitations Chancellor's Back Packed Notices January and June Ongoing PTA and SLT Monthly Monthly Notices Schoolwide- memos and Flyers Ongoing We will use in-house staff who can assist with the translation of the documents. T & I unit will translate all general notices in covered languages. We will use in-house staff who can assist with the translation of the documents. T & I unit will translate all general notices in covered languages. These notices are usually all ready pre-translated into the covered languages. We will use in-house staff who can assist with the translation of the documents. T & I unit will translate all general notices in covered languages. We will use in-house staff who can assist with the translation of the documents. T & I unit will translate all general notices in covered languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night September 26 interpretation service(s)? Our School Secretary and AP are fluent in Spanish and they will provide translation. Language line, phone script 4  Parent Teacher Conference November 29 -30 Parent-Teacher Conference March 7 - 8 Parent-Teacher Conference May 9 Parent Engagement Tuesdays Ongoing Every Tuesday Our School Secretary and AP are fluent in Spanish and they will provide translation. Language line, phone script Our School Secretary and AP are fluent in Spanish and provides translations. Language line, phone script Our School Secretary and AP are fluent in Spanish and provides translations. Language line, phone script Our School Secretary and AP are fluent in Spanish and provides translations. Language line, phone script 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency we have four staff members School Secretary, Assistant Principal, Teacher and Social Worker who can provide translation services to our 11.55% of parents that required Spanish. The staff has been trained to use the language line we have inserted the three-step flyer to access language line along with the class rooster, which contains parent contact information in the event of an emergency into class emergency folders. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 5  We hold a PD session with our staff members to ensure that all teachers understand the policies with regards to translations services in the beginning of each year. A copy of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 is given to all staff members at that time. We will also plan a PD where the school Language Access Coordinator will train school staff on the various language resources available to them. The parent coordinator will also make sure that all the staff receive a folder with phone numbers, scripts and surveys to express support needed for seamless and ongoing translation and interpretation services for families. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will provide the following: - Home language Identification preference sheets for interpretation services for both written and oral communication- - Multi-Language welcome poster and language ID guide are displayed - Send out bilingual notifications to parents. - At the beginning of each year we reach out to our new parents who have a preferred language other than Spanish to survey their interpretation and translation needs. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The parent coordinator will conduct a survey with those parents to look to improve language services. 6 
