 09X274 School Name: THE NEW AMERICAN ACADEMY AT ROBERTO CLEMENTE STATE PARK Principal: PEPE GUTIERREZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The New American -Academy at P.S 274 320900010274 Pre-K to5 th grades School Number (DBN): 09X274 275 Harlem River Park Bridge, Bronx, NY 10453 718 901 9703 Phone Number: 718 901 9709 Fax: PepeGutierrez pgutierrez@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Email Address: Pepe E. Gutierrez Marie Colomer TBD Fall Keisha Green TBD Fall na SCAN director, Ms. Ogarro CBO Representative: District Information Geographical District: 9 Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue, Bronx, NY 10456 Superintendent’s Office Address: LRosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 579 7143 Phone Number: NA Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2Aschools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718 828-7776 Phone Number: NA Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Pepe E. Gutierrez Marie Colomer Jessica Bethea Kathleen Grant Kissie Alexander Marian O' Garro Michelle Roberts Gloria Martinez Juliana Rodriguez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative PTA Secretary/Parent PTA Co President/Parent Member/Parent   Name DahianaReyes Lourdes Prieto-Lopez Keisha Green Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) PTA Treasurer/Parent Member/Staff/Chair Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Staff / Parent / Parent / Parent /Parent   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission statement is “to empower learners and inspire leaders to make this a better world.” Section 4: CEP Overview Our school is centered around the idea that student achievement is directly tied to the quality of teacher instruction. It is only by attracting, developing, and retaining skilled and talented teachers that significant educational progress can be made. The quality of an education system cannot exceed the quality of its teachers. Research has shown that of all the controllable factors in an education system, the most important by far is the effectiveness of the classroom teacher. To that end our school operates to empower students and teachers alike through a team and relationship-  based approach. Our grade-level cohorts are supported by a grade-level leaders who is further supported by our Instructional Rounds practitioner and Curriculum Director. Our team and relationship based approach to teaching serves as the archetype that will empower our student learners and inspire future leaders to be productive citizens to our republic. Instructional Focus: If we provide our teachers with data-informed, research based instructional strategies that focus on a student centered approach to learning, then they will be able to deliver engaging instruction utilizing close reading and the math 5 practices. This will result in our students demonstrating critical thinking and using tools to persevere when challenged with high quality ELA and Math tasks. Our school community will engage in the following to improve teacher practice and student outcomes:  All teachers (K-5th Grade) trained and implementing 5 Practices for math instruction  All teachers (K-5th Grade) trained and implementing close reading strategies  ELT will conduct LCV (Literacy Classroom Visits) to collect implementation data for future professional development sessions and successful practices to share at the building level  Teachers in all grades will focus on all the components of balanced literacy   AIS provided by AIS teachers using Leveled Literacy Intervention (LLI) to students reading 1-2 years below Small group guided reading instruction to all students grade level  Read aloud to model reading behaviors and thinking aloud  Engage students in discussion about text  Paideia Seminars  Direct instruction in phonics and decoding strategies Independent reading to practice applying strategies  Literacy centers   PL focused specifically on Close Reading and Math 5 Practices Inter-visitations, teaching rounds and coaching to improve quality of literacy instruction 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. PS 274, is an elementary school located in Community District 9 in the Bronx, NY comprised of grades Pre-K through 5th grade. As indicated by data provided by ATS November of 2018, P.S. 274 currently services 726 students in grades PK – 5th. 58.4% percent of our students are Hispanic, 39.12% of our students are Black, 1.24% American Indian or Alaskan Native, 1.1% White and 0.14% Multi-Racial. 100% of our students are eligible to receive free lunch. 16.5% of our students are English Language Learners. Of this 16.5%, 23%, percent are English Language Learners with disabilities. Twenty- three percent of our students are students with disabilities. Of this 23%, 7% of our students with IEPs receive related services only. of our students with IEPs receive SETSS. 9% spend less than 20% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services. 1% of our students with disabilities spend between 21% and 59% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services. 34% of our students spend more than 60% of their week in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes. While 48% of our students received Self-Contained services more than 60% of the week. 21% of our students are living in temporary housing. 0  PS 274 operates using an open classroom concept with a team teaching approach. Each grade is comprised of a cohort of 100-150 students who loop together with their teachers. Each cohort is comprised of 5 to 7 teachers, which is further supported by a grade level leader and instructional coach who is charged with mentoring the team of adults and ensuring sound instructional practice for the students. PS 274 operates using an open classroom concept with a team teaching approach. Each grade is comprised of a cohort of 100-150 students who loop together with their teachers. Each cohort is led by a teaching team of 5 or 7 teachers with, which includes Curriculum Implementation Director who is charged with mentoring the team of adults and ensuring sound instructional practice for the students. Through the PROSE program we are able to also dedicate ample team-planning time additional to the 150 contractual minutes. Each team will meet during their common planning period to collaborate, vet lessons, analyze student data, meet with parents, discuss students, plan curriculum, and view recorded lessons using the lens of instructional rounds. Additionally, each teacher team engages in reflective practice using a reflective protocol, which includes a meeting with a reflective practitioner every 6 weeks. All instructional coaches, grade level leaders and the Principal, will meet once a week on Mondays throughout the school year to discuss and make decisions on school policies and procedures. Grade Level Leaders meet with the ELT bi-monthly in order to analyze student data and strategically plan for improvement. All new faculty members attend summer professional learning series which includes a week at long training to engage in learning around reflective listening and understand Myers-Briggs Personality Profiles. Over the past six years, P.S. 274 has built productive partnerships with both SCAN NY and Roberto Clemente State Park. SCAN NY provides supplemental after school services for our students. Additionally Roberto Clemente State Park allows us to utilize their facilities for our physical education program. Finally, in order to best serve and meet the needs of our students and their families, our work as a Community School has grown tremendously over the past few years. We offer a wide array of health and well-being services for students and families. These include full, on-site dental services two times a year; vision services for all students; dedicated attendance mentoring for chronically absent students; weekly parent workshops/resource opportunities and monthly parent engagement activities focused on wellness and family bonding time initiatives. Because we firmly believe that the success of our students relates directly to the well-being of their families, we deem our school model to be an essential element of our overall school plan. This year we will also continue to build on our 2 learning initiatives started during the 2018-2019 school year: Saturday STEAM Program and Hour of Coding, Hour of Coding: Hour of Coding will kick off during the week of December 4th – December 10th. All students will engage in computer science based activities that will encourage/improve critical thinking skills by teaching children how to solve problems in IT, which also transfers to developing new ways of creative thinking in all other content areas. During this week, the students will engage in interactive, hands-on activities where they will learn computational thinking skills in an approachable way. Students will create their own apps or games they can show their parents during our Coding Celebration and we’ll also print Hour of Code certificates they can bring home. Saturday STEAM Program: Through the process of experimenting and exploring our students will use creative and critical thinking skills as they engage in STEAM based projects. Our students will use the same critical thinking skills as 1  scientists, mathematicians, engineers and artists to find new and innovative solutions. Students will engage in science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics related activities that allow them to think critically and how to problem solve. Students will build problem-solving skills, discover how things work, explore engineering as a career option, learn math and science while having fun. Students will participate in activities such as exploring the density of liquids by making fireworks in a jar, chemical reactions, polymers and fluorescence while making awesome glowing slime and build and code a LEGO MINDSTORMS EV3 robot and incorporate art and science as they create science based art projects such as gravity art painting. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners: 16.5% of our student composition is English Language Learners. As indicated by the NYSESLAT 36 % of our students are expanding. This is a strong indicator that many of our students have strong command in social language. However, based on results of NYS Assessment and NYSESLAT only % of our students meeting proficiency levels of expanding or commanding. This indicates that our students demonstrate independence in advancing his or her academic language skills. However, as measured by the NYSESLAT students “stuck” at the transitioning and expanding levels lack the linguistic demands necessary to demonstrate proficiency in a variety of academic contexts within this grade level. Our transitioning and expanding ELLs are able to function socially in both English and their home language. However, their language is imprecise and inadequate for deeper expression and communication, and they lack the vocabulary, syntax, and grammar of native speakers in both languages. Our long term ELLs (LTELs) lack oral and literacy skills needed for academic success. They struggle reading textbooks, have difficulty understanding vocabulary, and are challenged by long, written passages. They lack understanding of academic genres and display weak English syntax, grammar, and vocabulary. Our LTELs have significant deficits in writing. They perform below grade level in reading and writing, and lack academic vocabulary, they struggle in all content areas that require literacy. In our on going effort to help our ELLs reach the highest level of proficiency as identified by NYSESLAT, our ELLs will be targeted during instructional periods as well as during our after school ELL Program that not only focuses on social language but also provides great emphasis on academic language specifically focusing on “what am I being asked to do?” A more detailed description of specific strategies is listed below. Intervention and strategies:  CCLS Curriculum: A broadened school-wide curriculum that includes science, arts, and social studies. This will help to deepen content knowledge and provide opportunities for ELLs to develop the academic language required for success in those subjects. Language Development Opportunities: Provide LTELs with instruction that incorporates academic language development that focuses on powerful oral language development, explicit literacy development, instruction in the academic uses of English, high-quality writing, extensive reading of relevant texts, a focus on active student engagement and accountable participation, and an emphasis on academic language and complex vocabulary. Paideia Seminars, 5 Mathematical Practices, accountable talk etc. Specially Designed Academic Instruction in English (SDAIE) Training: Train teachers on SDAIE strategies to scaffold access to the content.    Data Monitoring: LTELs are carefully monitored, with extra academic support triggered as needed (e.g., Saturday School, tutors, homework support, afterschool).  Explicit Academic and Literacy Instruction: Explicit academic language and literacy development across the curriculum with a focus on comprehension, vocabulary development, and advanced grammatical structures needed to comprehend and produce academic language. Lesson Design: Design lessons around carefully structured language objectives for integrating subject matter content, focusing on content-related reading and writing skills and carefully planned activities that encourage students to actively use language, with an emphasis on meaning making and engaging with the academic content.  2  Students with Disabilities: Data from the New York State Common Core ELA State Assessments for the 2016-2017 school year compared to 2015-2016 New York State Common Core ELA State Assessments demonstrate that our SWD scoring at proficiency levels 3 and 4 decreased by over 4% from 5.5% to 1.2%. We believe that increasing students’ reading achievement occurs when students are independent thinkers and learners, know themselves as learners, have a passion for literacy; and when our instruction is rooted in purposeful and consistent data analysis; deliberate differentiation for individuals and small groups; and high-leverage intervention. As suggested by our modified 2017-2018 instructional focus these students need daily immersion in evidence based reading, writing and discussion activities in order to improve their ability to understand text as evidenced by CCLS aligned higher order questions. In order to meet the instructional shifts as identified by CCLS our teachers have adjusted their lesson planning to ensure exposure to grade level texts. However, our SWDs need ample opportunities to practice reading and comprehension strategies explicitly taught in class during independent reading at their zone of proximal development. Our students require carefully “Scaffolded” CCLS aligned lessons that promote critical thinking and analysis. In addition classroom teachers need the pedagogical expertise in order to differentiate lessons that appeal to the multiple intelligences of their diverse learners. Lastly in order to meet the needs of our SWD’s educators need to pay close attention to the information included in the psycho educational reports of IEPs to understand the actual deficits of individual learners, how their learning is impacted and then tailor lesson plans to meet those needs. In order to improve comprehension teachers need to be aware of verbal vs. nonverbal skills of students with severe inability to comprehend texts. Our special education teachers also need more training on specially designed instruction in order to increase the trajectory of SWDs scoring proficiency levels 3 and 4. During class intervention and strategies:  Teachers' explicit instruction  Deliberate differentiation coupled with consistent data analysis to inform small group and individualized instruction  Planning lessons with all learning modalities in mind  Provide opportunities for students to have various ways to demonstrate their understanding  Exposure to not only grade level material but materials that meet the needs of all learners  Additional time for re-teaching using a variety of instructional strategies General Education: Similar to the results for our SWD’s data from the New York State Common Core ELA State Assessments for the 2016-2017 school year compared to 2015-2016 New York State Common Core ELA State Assessments demonstrate that our general education population scoring at proficiency levels 3 and 4 also decreased by over 9% from 26.1% to 16.7 % Beyond the challenges described above, our general education population greatest needs include multiple opportunities to engage in daily evidence based reading, writing and discussion activities so they can improve their ability to understand text as evidenced by CCLS aligned higher order questions. We will target and focus on academic gains by utilizing research-driven data practices. For instance, we will group our upper grade target group as follows; Students that tested on proficiency levels 2.6—3.1 (Group 2) and above will be targeted for enrichment during instructional periods and during our early bird and after school programs in order to maintain and/or exceed current levels as indicated by their NYS assessments. 3  Students that tested on proficiency levels 1.7—2.1 (Group 1) will be targeted for remediation during instructional periods, during our early bird program and our Saturday Learning Academy in order to increase proficiency levels as indicated by their NYS assessments. Target goal is a minimum of 10 students per class. Our data reveals that in order to target “these many students” we need to expand our 2 group to also include students testing on proficiency levels 2.3—2.5 During-class interventions and strategies: Class sized reduction: in order for home teacher to target Group 2. Cluster teacher to pull out 1 group for AIS (using guided reading and LLI. Research/Information: Library Media Specialist will work with Group 1 students 2 days a week pulling 10 students from 2 classes a total of 20 students to work on standard based objectives while classroom teacher target Group 2 students in grades 3 -5. Test Sophistication: 6-week prior to NYS assessments students will be reassessed and then regrouped (no more than 10 students per group) based on standard weaknesses and then given direct instruction in order to improve strength in specific standards. Hour of Coding: Once a week all classroom teachers will engage in computer science based activities that will encourage/improve critical thinking skills by teaching children how to solve problems in IT, which also trasfers to developing new ways of creative thinking in all other content areas. Out of Class Interventions: Morning Early Bird Program 7:25 am- 8am (4x per week) Breakfast during homeroom: Group 1 students will be split into 2 groups; Group A and Group B. Group A group will receive direct instruction while Group B is independently using IReady. Then on alternate days Group B will receive direct instruction while Group A is independently using IReady. After School Scholar’s Academy (2x per week): Group 2 students will engage in reading, writing and math activities using After school targeting for 2 group students in 10:1 student to teacher ratio. Saturday Learning Academy: Group 1 students will engage in phonics, math and reading activities in order to ensure that we are not letting our RTI and intervention groups lag further behind. Saturday STEAM Program: Students will engage in science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics related activities that allows them to think critically and how to problem solve. During the present academic year, beyond the challenges described below, we will target and focus on academic gains by utilizing research-driven data practices. For instance, we will group our upper grade target group as follows; · 2.6—3.1+ ( 2 group) and 1.7—2.1 (1 group) groups to be targeted as per NYS assessments. 4  · Target goal is a minimum of 10 students per class… Our data reveals that in order to target “these many students” we need to expand our 2 group to include 2.3—2.5 During-class interventions and strategies: · Size reduction in order for home teacher to target the 2 group: Cluster teacher to pull out 1 group for AIS (Guided reading and LLI) · Schedule the two library days with 1 group from two classes so that home teachers target 2 group in 3 to 5 grades. · 6-week prior to test enrichment in tiered groups of 10 students. Out of Class Interventions: After school targeting for 2 group students in 10:1 student to teacher ratio. Saturday academy to target the 1 group of students in order to ensure that we are not letting our RTI and intervention groups to lag farther behind. The challenges we face at PS 274 are: instruction that includes multiple entry points, particularly in the delivery of mathematics instruction, social emotional support for our students, as well as increased meaningful parent involvement. We are working on increasing our parent involvement by inviting parents in for Friday parent forums, curriculum celebrations, PTA functions, and by having an open door policy. PS 274 will work to improve the social emotional support we provide to our students through the addition of counselors through partnering with Counseling in Schools. Through reflecting on previous lessons and instruction, we have discovered that our teachers need more professional development on how to use data in order to adjust and deliver mathematics and language arts content, including multiple entry points and adjusting the delivery of our instruction to meet the needs of all learners, as well as keeping the aim of the lesson focused. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 5  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X274 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 797 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 63 61 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 24 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 92.3% % Reduced Lunch 15.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 60.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.25 5% 25% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 16.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 64% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 38 38 86.3% 0.9% 26.1% 36.6% 0.6% 1.5% 0 20% 2.4 14.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A YSH NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on data received from end-of-year i-Ready assessments, end-of-year MOSL assessments, and NYS Exams, students have shown limited growth in reading and math proficiency through our implementation of small-group instruction in conjunction with the school's coherent and engaging curriculum in ELA and Math, along with their six interdisciplinary units in Social Studies and Science, which offers opportunities for all students to engage in focused learning experiences aligned and connected to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that positively impact learning outcomes across grades and subjects. The school curricula is aligned to the schools’ key standards and provides varied challenges to afford students opportunities to acquire and apply knowledge, and skills to close the achievement gap and ensure all students are cognitively engaged. The school has made adjustments to curriculum maps and lesson plans in order to ensure that there is a focus on priority standards and concepts allowing for the school's consistency in implementing literacy and mathematics instructional shifts in all grades. Although instruction is engaging and teacher pedagogy is strong, a majority of our students are still performing below grade level in mathematics according to end-of-year i-Ready benchmark (84%) data for the 2016-2017 school-year. In order for our students to demonstrate academic growth, teachers need training on how to adjust and refine curriculum to meet the needs of all students and continued professional development to further improve their pedagogy. Special Education (21.4% of student population) students and English Native Language Learners (16.8% of student population) are our priority subgroups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the average of students in Grades 3-5 performing at target level (on grade level) will increase by 4% as measured by the New York State Common Core Math Assessments. Through implementing targeted instructional practices, students will demonstrate their ability to make sense of problems, persevere in solving them, construct viable arguments and critique the reasoning of others. 7  By June 2019, students in Grades 3-5 performing at Levels 3 and 4 will increase by 5% from 17% to 22%. Our percentage of students scoring Level 2 will decrease from 37% to 32% and our students scoring Level 1 will decrease from 46% to 40% as measured by the New York State Common Core English Language Arts Assessment. Through skillfully planned close reading lessons, students will demonstrate their ability to critically analyze complex text, answer text dependent questions and cite text evidence in their writing of informational essays, narratives, opinions or argumentative pieces. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal, Assistant Principal, Instructional Rounds Practitoner, Teachers All Grade Level Teacher Teams will meet monthly to engage in Teacher Rounds, which is a professional development strategy with multiple goals. Teacher Rounds: All teachers 09/2018-06/2019  helps teachers develop a common vision of effective practice and common language to engage in discussion around improvement. increases teacher repertoire by through consistent sharing of best practices and implementation of commitments for improvement. creates accountability around steps for improvement through records of practice.    provides support for novice and veteran teachers.  helps teachers remain focused on the instructional goal by providing consistent feedback on implementation of The 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions and Close Reading. contributes to a culture of collaboration and high expectations.  Teachers will engage in professional learning cycles centered on Close Reading. All 09/2018-06/2019 Teachers Participants in the session will develop understanding and strengthen skills with: Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors, teachers, AIS Teacher  Understanding and Evaluating Text Complexity  Understanding the Role of the Close Reader  Planning, Teaching, and Managing Close Reading  Reading Across the Disciplines  Supporting Academic Communication About Closely Read Texts  Assessing to Support Meaning Making During Close Reading Academic Intervention will be used with small groups of students based on data from NYSCCLS Assessments. The Cycle 1 09/2017 Principal, Assistant Principals, Curriculum 9 interventions are provided individually and in small groups using i-ready on-line program and LLI. Pushables 11/2017 Implementation Directors, teachers In order to build transparency and trust across the school community, information concerning academic intervention is shared with parents at weekly parent forums, in weekly newsletters, at 1 on 1 meetings, and parent teacher conferences. Academic Intervention will be used with small groups of students based on data from NYSCCLS Assessments. The interventions are provided individually and in small groups using i-ready on-line program and LLI. In order to build transparency and trust across the school community, information concerning academic intervention is shared with parents at weekly parent forums, in weekly newsletters, at 1 on 1 meetings, and parent teacher conferences. 02/2018 Level 2s 04/2018 2.89-3.19 06/2018 10/1/2018-11/21/2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Curriculum Implementation Directors, teachers Cycle 2 11/26/2018 1/11/2019 Students performing more than 4 levels below and/or have scored Level 1 or Low 2 on NYSCC Assessments 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Newsletters will be sent home on a weekly basis. Newsletters will inform parents of what the students are working on in each subject area and will include handouts to support parents in working with their child on skills and standards currently being taught. Grade team leaders will be responsible for ensuring that newsletters are written and sent home each Friday. Grade level leaders and all team members Our teacher teams will hold a back to school night in order to inform our parents of the curriculum and how it relates to the CCLS standards. Additionally our Dual Language Team will hold a back to school night in order to relate to our DL parents of the expectations of the program. Our Annual Title I parent meeting--as is traditional in our school--is a great opportunity to explore and explain how the general school budget supports our efforts described in the present document. On Tuesdays, teacher teams, Parent Coordinator and/or administrative team will hold parent forum/workshops focused on reading, writing, math and social emotional development. The goal of the workshops is to help parents better understand the rigorous demands as outlined by CCLS and how to foster social and emotional wellness. Topics include but are not limited to Stand Up Speak Out, Make a Difference Parents Against Bullying Summit, Reading Strategies for Your Child At Home, Math Matters, etc. Parent Teacher Conferences: During school year 2018-19 PS 274 will host 4 Parent Student Teacher Conferences. Conferences will focus on learning, behavioral and social concerns. The teacher/student will review the child’s 0  progress, including strengths and areas in needs of improvements. Teachers will also provide specific tips on parents can help their children at home. PS 274 will hold our annual Family Literacy Night and Read and Feed Picnic En Blanc. Our goal is to flood homes in our community with high quality literature. Beyond providing literature we also will use this event to equip our parents with effective read a loud strategies and follow up activities that parents can use at home with their children to foster a love of reading. Math Speed Carousel Evening and Math and Muffins: To support our families in the understanding of the rigorous math standards, mathematical shifts and understanding of content we will host our Math Speed Carousel Evening and Math and Muffins. In February 2019 we will set up several math stations for parents to visit. Parents will have ten minutes at each station to participate in a math game that reinforces a skill appropriate for their child’s grade level! At the end of the evening parents will have an opportunity to make and take an activity from one of the stations they visited. In May of 2019during our Muffins and Math with Mom, parents will visit classrooms as teachers deliver common core aligned math lesson. Parents will have an opportunity to help their students to complete the math task while dining on yummy treats in honor of Mother’s Day. Mad Scientists Night: In April parents will join us for an evening of STEAM related activities that encompasses reading, writing and math CCLS standards. Oversight for all activities described above will be provided by administration, curriculum directors, grade level leaders, grade level teams, Counseling in Schools, Parent Coordinator and/or PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. For the present academic year we will fully fund the acquisition of the entire catalog of printed material of Eureka Math. o Instructional Materials to meet the needs of at risk students. e.g. Engage NY, I-ready on-line, and Ready NY print books. Time allotted for Principals Forums, Time allotted for 1 on 1 parent meetings o Teachers will receive differentiated professional development during the school day by curriculum directors, partner teachers and by the Borough Field Support Office/and or via per session as funding permits. o Master Teachers, Teachers, Principal and Parent Coordinator will host literacy and math workshops, Time allotted for analyzing data in order to group students Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A 1  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, the average of students performing at target level (on grade level) will increase by 2% as measured by i-Ready Math Assessment. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) I-ready Winter Benchmark Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school will leverage the strengths in order to improve attendance in our school. The school has an intentionally designed daily schedule which allows all teams to spend time in order to "look at attendance." Intentional partnerships have been forged with the Harvard Graduate School of Education in order to support the school’s mission of being a “relationship driven learning organization” as well as a partnership with Google Suites for Education, to provide a digital platform for classroom activities and teacher collaboration. Scheduled, weekly reflection sessions also helps to strengthen the collaborative relationships amongst team members. The relationship approach to our school will be leveraged to increase student attendance in our school. The prior academic school-year our attendance was 90%. Our attendance needs will be addressed by forming a robust attendance team led by the principal and hold weekly focused meeting. Secondly we will implement a success mentor program aimed at fostering positive relationships amongst chronically absent students with strategies and resources aimed at improving student attendance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% increase in student attendance as evidenced by the school-wide average. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional  programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Mentoring Attendance Plan developed with SLT to include parents to help boost attendance. The program assigns mentor adults to a set number of students on the chronic absenteeism list with the goal of having these particular students be in school as often as possible. Teacher teams will meet using school wide protocol for prevention of absenteeism. It will include the creation of Attendance awards to be given monthly. E All Teachers Teachers can offer:  Positive comments to children.  Positive notes home, calls or texts to parents that appreciate their efforts to get their children to school as often as possible and on time.  Extra time at the computer, PE, or  recess. First-in-line privileges for lunch or dismissal  Pencils, pens, stickers, posters, book covers, book marks, etc.  Team certificates for the best record or most improved record.  Name on the “Attendance Wall” in the classroom Students with chronic absenteeism 09/2018-06/2019 SLT All Teachers and Students 09/2018-06/2019 09/2018-06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors, teachers Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors, teachers 4   Chance to act as teacher’s assistant *Note: Please ask Noemi for incentive supplies. Additionally, if you have a creative and ongoing plan on how to improve attendance in your classroom please check with Keisha or Pepe and Chonte for ordering materials for your project. Administration will/can offer:  Certificate/award during curriculum celebrations.  Breakfast/lunch with the principal.  School supplies (pencil with logo, or flash drives) Smoothie or Pizza party for class with best attendance. (monthly)   Choice of donated products (movie, tickets, gift certificate) Traveling trophy for grade-level homeroom with best monthly attendance.  Age-appropriate rewards for most improved attendance. Engagement Engaging Families:    Launching of the “EVERYDAY COUNTS” initiative assembly for parents in early September Family handouts Introduction of the Success Mentor program.  Explanation of the ladder of intervention.  Tips for parents Engaging students:  Attendance is instructional time, not a separate operational function; 5  attendance data informs instruction.  With teachers, expect accuracy in attendance records. Also, norm the rules and consequences for absences/lateness. Don’t allow students to “absent” themselves into failure.  Expect students to monitor their own attendance and account for their missed days.  Engaging teachers: Monitor Watch the Numbers:  Teacher take daily attendance during morning homeroom.  Teachers monitor for errors in attendance from the previous day. For example, a teacher notices that a particular student’s ATS attendance reflects an absence “A” but the student came in late, the teacher must communicate to Noemi either by phone or note attached to the attendance sheet. Jackie and Pepe will look at RSAL daily to get a feel for the numbers—not the attendance rate but the # present, # absent and # missing attendance. Stay on top of the numbers: (Refer to Appendix 1, 2 and 3:)   Early Outreach Success Mentor Program: 6   Mentors: Quintell, Jackie, Jeremiah, Lopez, Ana, Noemi, Chonte, Ayisha…  Other members of attendance team: Pepe, Keisha,  Mentors monitor a set of assigned students with “chronic” absenteeism during the 2017-2018 school-year. (about 20 absences or so)  Weekly attendance team meetings led by Pepe. In efforts to support and guide our attendance committee team, we use the following reports generated by ATS, RRSA, RAMO, RSIV, RCUA, RDAL, RCUA, and RR4R. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement School Secretary 09/2018-06/2019 Office Staff How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Newsletters will be sent home on a weekly basis. Newsletters will inform parents of what the students are working on in each subject area and will include handouts to support parents in working with their child on skills and standards currently being taught. Grade team leaders will be responsible for ensuring that newsletters are written and sent home each Friday. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time allotted for 90 minute morning meeting, time allotted for individual teacher meetings with Principal and Curriculum Implementation directors, time allotted for SLT planning of attendance outreach. Time allotted for attendance mentors. Time allotted will be completing during school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, there will be a 1.5% increase in student attendance as per the school-wide overall average Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In efforts to support and guide our attendance committee team, we use the following reports generated by ATS, RRSA, RAMO, RSIV, RCUA, RDAL, RCUA, and RR4R. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2018-2019 school year we will continue to work on improving our Collaborative Data talks to inform instruction and impact student success. We have talented teachers who are doing good work, but there must be a more direct connection between their work and student learning. We need to focus on the connection between instruction and data. Furthermore, we must ensure that instruction is targeting student need. Our strengths lie in our distributive leadership structure where all levels of our constituency participate in the decision making process. Our area of growth lies in the leveraging of that positive structure in order to implement a culture of data-driven structure. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all grade-level teams will hold 2 Collaborative Data Talks per month from October to May, in order to inform instruction and impact student success. Additionally, at least one of those data talks will be conducted in collaboration with either the assistant and/or principal. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Curriculum implementation Directors will schedule Collaborative Data Talk sessions on the 1st and 3rd Wednesday of each month for their grade-level team. All Teachers 9/2018-05/2019 Curriculum implementation Directors The structure will be based on Balanced Literacy protocol visitations along with the target group of students as per the NYS assessments data and classroom/teacher data collection. Grade-level teams will use the Trend Analysis Protocol during each Collaborative Data Talk session to measure student impact. All Teachers 10/2018-05/2019 Curriculum implementation Directors ELT will monitor and analyze school-wide data once a month to provide grade-level specific feedback and actionable next steps with time frames. All Teachers, Principal 9/2018-6/2019 ELT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Newsletters will be sent home on a weekly basis. Newsletters will inform parents of what the students are working on in each subject area and will include handouts to support parents in working with their child on skills and standards currently being taught. Grade team leaders will be responsible for ensuring that newsletters are written and sent home each Friday. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time allotted for 90 minute meeting, time allotted for individual teacher meetings with Principal and Curriculum implementation Directors, time allotted for planning of Professional Learning Cycles (during ELT), funding for professional books, resources and materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 0  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in 2 collaborative data-analysis sessions per month from October-February, in order to inform instruction and impact student success. One data session will be in collaboration with a member of the Educational Leadership Team (Principal, Assistant Principal or Curriculum implementation director) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Collaborative Data Analysis in collaboration with District Public Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report, 91% of teachers feel that there is inclusive principal leadership and 96% of teachers feel they have an influential voice within the school. 95% of teachers feel there is program cohesion and 95% of teachers agree that the principal participates in instructional leadership. The present academic year, the educational leadership team with input from the teaching teams will develop a multi-year curriculum plan which includes decisions regarding curriculum track that will best serve our students population, both academically and emotionally. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Educational Leadership Team (with a representative from each grade level team) will hold a minimum of 3 collaborative meetings per month from October 2017 to May 2018 in order to develop a cohesive school vision that promotes teacher development and student achievement 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders will develop a set schedule and reserve dates on the school calendar to includes 3 meetings per month with a specific agenda. We will adopt the DATA WISE agenda structure in order to foster efficiency, accuracy and accountability of our meetings School leaders will create an agenda which will include time to revise our program to improve clarity and cohesion, time for data review in order to plan professional learning opportunities and to monitor student progress in order to adjust plans. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers 10/2018 – 5/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors School leaders will share data related to student progress and recommend interventions based on data review.. All Teachers 10/2018 – 5/2019 School leaders will share data related to teacher performance with staff and create professional learning opportunities based on the data. All Teachers 10/2018 – 5/2019 The Educational Leadership Team will set school-wide goals for professional learning, quality instruction and student progress. All Teachers 10/2018 – 5/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Newsletters will be sent home on a weekly basis. Newsletters will inform parents of what the students are working on in each subject area and will include handouts to support parents in working with their child on skills and standards currently being taught. 3  Grade team leaders will be responsible for ensuring that newsletters are written and sent home each Friday. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time allotted 3 times a month for the Principal to meet with the Curriculum Implementation Directors , technology to share pertinent information such as student data or during professional learning, school-wide data tracking templates, resources necessary to hold professional learning sessions which may include technology, books, or facilitators. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019, the Educational Leadership Team (with a representative from each grade level team) will have attended a minimum of 3 meetings per month from October 2018 to February 2019 in order to develop a cohesive school vision that promotes teacher development and student achievement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Keeping agendas and action plans from our weekly Educational Leadership Team meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the results from the 2017-2018 Framework for Great Schools Report 91% of parents say School Leadership promotes family and community involvement in the school. We are committed to increasing parent involvement and partnerships within our school community in order to improve student achievement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, the school will host 5 curriculum celebrations that showcase student learning in order to increase parent engagement in school activities as measured by grade-level curriculum celebration sign-in sheets. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Curricular celebration invitations will be sent home at least 1 week prior to event date. All students and families November December February May June Parent calendars and newsletters will include dates for curricular celebrations throughout the year.r. All students and families 10/2018 – 06/2019 During weekly team meetings, on Tuesdays, teachers will plan curricular celebrations and review data related to parent involvement at previous events. All students and families 10/2018– 06/2019 Parent forums will be hosted every Friday and parent workshops will be hosted on a monthly basis. Topics for workshops will be selected based on parent feedback via our parent coordinator. All students and families 10/2018 – 06/2019 Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors Principal, Assistant Principal, Curriculum Implementation Directors, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. SCAN NY Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 6  Resources, including but not limited to technology, for hosting curriculum celebrations Morning meeting time for teacher teams to plan curriculum celebrations Survey to determine the need and effectiveness of workshops provided for parents Books for parent book study Time and location allotted for weekly meeting with parents, Funding Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2018, the school will host 3 curriculum celebrations that showcase student learning in order to increase parent engagement in school activities as measured by grade-level curriculum celebration sign-in sheets. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Grade Curriculum Celebrations flyers and parent sign-in sheets. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) F&P Running Records, Classroom assignments End-of-Unit assessments PBA Project-based Assessments Project-based Assessment Behavior profile, Attendance, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Conferencing Small Group During school day close readings conferencing projects Projects Projects Small Group After School During School Day After School Whole-class During School Whole-class During School Small Group/Individual Counseling, Small Group and individual DuringSchool Academic profile Attendance outreach 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 146 Students In addition to providing support with the mandated Title I funds for students, our school has been provided funds by the office of the chancellor to hire a social worker to support our STH population directly. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 6-step hiring process for teachers. Each team is comprised by at least one special educator and a bilingual/ESL/TESOL teacher. Each team is compromised by at least one SPED educator. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). hour and a half of weekly planning as a team Daily mentoring/coaching and PL provided by curriculum directors. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 1  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). We currently serve four Pre-kindergarten programs. Our pre-k programs utilizes the same thematic interdisciplinary units of study, we host joint parent involvement activities (Interdisciplinary celebrations). Some of out teachers can/will "loop" with our students as they enter our kindergarten program. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our teachers directly and indirectly-through their Curriculum implementation directors-have input in the selection of curriculum, assessment, MOSL and MOTP assessments. Teacher teams select Professional Learning cycles and suggest, participate and facilitate school-wide professional learning. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local school allocation amounts) $671,747 0 $17,358 0 $5,361,113 Column A Verify with an (X) X na x na X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a-e na 5a-e na 5a-e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 3   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X274, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.S. 274 The New American Academy at Roberto Clemente State Park will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students · providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; · providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; · fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; · providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5  · sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; · providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: · actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; · engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; · ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; · support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; · maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; · conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; · provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 6  · host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); · schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; · translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; · conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: · holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; · hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; · encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; · supporting or hosting Family Day events; · establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; · encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; · providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; · developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; · providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X274, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between 7  the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: · using academic learning time efficiently; · respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; · implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; · offering high quality instruction in all content areas; · providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: · conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; · convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; · arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; · respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; · providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; · involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 8  · providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; · ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff · ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; · notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; · arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; · planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: · creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; · assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); · sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; · supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; · ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; · advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 9  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities · monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; · ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; · check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; · read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); · set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; · promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; · encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; · volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; · participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; · communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; · respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; · become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; · participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; · take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; · share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities · attend school regularly and arrive on time; · complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 0  · follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; · show respect for myself, other people and property; · try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; · always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: The New American Academy 274 This school is (check one): DBN: 09X274 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale, subgroups, and grades to be served The target population for our Title III program is English Language Learners (ELLs) between grades two through five. For grades two, three, and four we will invite ELLs who are provided services in either Dual Language (DL) or English as a New Language (ENL) settings during the regular school day. For grade five, we will invite ELLs who receive services in an ENL setting during the regular school day. Creating a comprehensive supplemental program for these grade levels will help our students improve their English proficiency. We have analyzed data compiled in our most recent LAP report. We have also analyzed data based on standardized test scores for two testing grades during the 2016/2017 school year. Data regarding our fourth graders: 75% of ELLs scored a Level 1 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. 25% of our ELLs scored a Level 2 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. 0% of our ELLs scored a Level 3 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. 0% of our ELLs scored a Level 4 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. 64% of our ELLs scored a Level 1 on the 2017 NYS Math exam. 36% of our ELLs scored a Level 2 on the 2017 NYS Math exam. 0% of our ELLs scored a Level 3 on the 2017 NYS Math exam. 0% of our ELLs scored a Level 4 on the 2017 NYS Math exam. Data regarding our fifth graders: 77% of or ELLs scored a Level 1 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. 23% of our ELLs scored a Level 2 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. 0% of or ELLs scored a Level 3 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. 0% of or ELLs scored a Level 4 on the 2017 NYS ELA exam. 92% of our ELLs scored a Level 1 on the 2017 NYS Math exam. 8% of our ELLS scored a Level 2 on the 2017 NYS Math exam. 0% of our ELLS scored a Level 3 on the 2017 NYS Math exam. 0% of our ELLS scored a Level 4 on the 2017 NYS Math exam. Based on this data our school will focus on improving students’ ability to master skills that will address these low scores. While second graders do not take these particular assessments, we are inviting them so that they will be prepared as third graders and to expose them to vocabulary. By targeting key NYS Common Core Standards, we hope to improve student outcomes while providing our target ELLs with an enriching cross-curricular program. An analysis of our current students' NYSESLAT 2017 scores for grades 2 through 5 reveals that: 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 15% of our ELLs scored at the Entering level on the 2017 NYSESLAT. 16% of our ELLs scored at the Emerging level on the 2017 NYSESLAT. 25% of our ELLs scored at the Transitioning level on the 2017 NYSESLAT. 34% of our ELLs scored at the Expanding level on the 2017 NYSESLAT. 9% of our ELLs scored at the Commanding level on the 2017 NYSESLAT. After an analysis of this data we have identified the subgroup of ELLs within these grades to focus on. For our 2018/2019 Title III program we will focus on students who have attained a level of either Transitioning or Expanding on the 2018 NYSESLAT. Only 9% of our sample ELLs tested out on the 2017 NYSESLAT. Much like the ELLs across District 9 our ELLs are stagnating at the Transitioning and Expanding levels. If students continue to test out at such a low rate, our Long Term ELL rate will continually increase. This will ultimately affect our Entering and Emerging ELLs because they need the most help. We will be so busy servicing students that don't really need us at the expense of our neediest population. According to the same data from the 2017 NYSESLAT, 59% of current ELLs grades 2 through 5 scored at either Transitioning or Expanding. Although most of these students fall into the category of Newcomers ELLs (0-3 years of service), most of them are not new to English. They are just new to the New York City school system and thus classified as newcomers. Our goal is to improve student test scores so that many of the ELLs can attain a level of commanding as they transition to the subgroup known as Developing ELLs (4-6 years of service). Furthermore, many of these ELLs have not made great gains on successive NYSESLAT exams. Helping them achieve NYSESLAT proficiency will enable us to concentrate on other ELL populations (Recent arrivals, Long-Term ELLs, ELL students with disabilities) in the future. Description of the Program Addressing the need to improve scores has helped us to identify who to invite to our program. We have established that need, however, we are not a school that is obsessed by standardized exams. At PS 274 we strive to create student centered classrooms and build on 21st Century Skills. 21st Century Student Outcome #1 revolves around student mastery of a myriad of disciplines including ELA, Arts, Science, Geography, and History. A true challenge for modern education is how to find a way to teach these subjects as an interconnected puzzle. At The New American Academy we have created five interdisciplinary units which are taught throughout the year. These units are Communication, Transportation, Energy, Engineering, and Agriculture/Husbandry. These units incorporate language arts, math, science, social studies, art, and technology. Our Title III program will also be grounded in our unique interdisciplinary program. Students will be taught how to ask and answer essential questions about their community and the world. Students will work on writing and create projects based on our science topics including natural disasters and world weather trends. They will read plays with historical themes such as “My Country”, and “Building up the White House”, by Teacher Created Materials. They will analyze the pros and cons of various forms of transportation. Another key component of study for our Title III program is vocabulary development. Students will create their own interactive personal dictionary using consumable books by EPS Literacy and Intervention. This interactive dictionary will consist of words that the teachers choose and other entries chosen by the student. We will focus on Tier 2 words. Helping students develop their writing and speaking skills using Tier 2 words will be beneficial because these words are used across different content areas and many are multiple meaning terms. Teachers will scaffold by utilizing best practices and strategies for English Language Development. These will include the use of tailored made graphic organizers to help ELLs organize their work. Total Physical Response activities will enable ELLs to build and demonstrate multiple learning styles based on Gardner’s Multiple Intelligence Theory. In 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information addition the use of role-plays, concentric circle activities, and conversation lines will allow students to hone their public speaking and active listening skills. This is especially important because although our Title III program will focus on reading and writing, we want students to develop their communication skills as well. Reading and writing will be the focus because those are the aspects of the NYSESLAT that our schools struggle the most with. This may seem obvious because academic language takes longer to acquire than communicative skills Just to be sure, we analyzed our students 2017 NYSESLAT scores and determined that in fact reading and specifically writing give our students the most trouble. Schedule and Duration Our Title III program will run for eighteen weeks on Wednesdays and Thursdays beginning November 14, 2018 and ending on March 14, 2019. The program will start at 3:20 and end at 4:50 (11/22/18, 12/26/18, 2/20/19, and 2/21/19 will be skipped for holidays). The program will have thirty-three days of instruction including 11/14/18, 11/15/18, 11/21/18, 11/28/18, 11/29/18, 12/5/18, 12/6/18, 12/12/18, 12/13/18, 12/19/18, 12/20/18, 1/2/19, 1/3/19, 1/9/19, 1/10/19, 1/16/19, 1/17/19, 1/23/19, 1/24/19, 1/30/19, 1/31/19, 2/6/19, 2/7/19, 2/13/19, 2/14/19, 2/20/19, 2/21/19, 2/27/19, 2/28/19, 3/6/19, 3/7/19, 3/13/19, and 3/14/19. The student to teacher ratio will be 10:1. There will be four groups in total. Teacher A will work with ten students for thirty-five minutes of instruction, then they with switch students with Teacher B. The same format will apply for Teacher C and Teacher D. The breakdown of activities is as follows: 3:20- after school snack 3:40- Content Study- The first segment of our program will introduce the topic of the day/week. Students will learn vocabulary related to the theme. The teacher will demonstrate a task and explain how the theme relates to the local area or a world location. The students will review vocabulary by inputting in their personal dictionary/ and/or fill out a graphic organizer. The goal of this segment is to have students develop content area proficiency. 4:15- Language/Arts Practice- The second segment of our program will allow students to create projects (ex. create a mosaic using tiles, build a bridge, create a project with clay). Alternatively the segment may involve an interactive learning game/communicative activity (practice a dialogue, memory, word puzzles). The goal of this segment of the program is to have the students engage the content while developing their communicative skills in Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing. 4:50 dismissal Language of Instruction Our program will be focused on English acquisition/ proficiency. Therefore English will be the language of instruction. However second, third, and, fourth grade students from our Dual Language program may be invited. Students will be allowed to use their home language/home languages to help transfer knowledge. For example, when adding to their personal dictionaries, students will have the option to include multiple languages for their entries. Bilingual dictionaries and glossaries will be available in Spanish, French, Arabic, and other languages so that students can practice using materials allowable as accommodations on state tests. Staffing There will be four positions available. These positions will be open to teachers holding TESOL or bilingual certification. Teachers who apply and cannot be hired will be offered the chance to substitute if a need arises. These positions will be officially posted. Teacher to student ratio will not exceed 10:1. Types of Materials Materials for our interdisciplinary unit will include social studies, science, and math books from the English Explorers series including the CD recording of the books. Reader’s Theater books and accompanying resources by Teacher Created Materials will be utilized. In addition, 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information we are looking at Worldscapes since the topics from that series reflect a cross curricular approach to vocabulary development. Other materials will include world atlases, picture dictionaries including Word by Word, and consumable notebooks by EPS. Art supplies will include clay, mosaic tiles, lego pieces, as well as traditional classroom materials. Students will be able to work with multiple mediums. Some of these materials will be used with OTPS funding, while others will be provided at no cost to Title III. All records will be maintained in the school office. This includes attendance records as well as program notification letters in multiple languages. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale The professional development component for our Title III programs will involve the teachers who will work directly for our Direct Instruction Supplemental Program and our parent engagement activity. It will involve a data analysis as well as curricular development for our Direct Instruction Plan and our Parent Engagement Night. Teachers will use information learned during the professional development cycle in the classroom, to reflect on their teaching practices, and to better inform parents/guardians. This professional development will be at cost to the Title III program. Records will be maintained in the school's main office including agendas and attendance sheets. This professional development will positively impact our ELLs by allowing the program providers to collaborate on interactive lessons. These lessons will include strategies for differentiating instructions for all ELLs. Teachers to receive training Only the teachers who will teach supplemental lessons or engage in our parent night will receive PD. Since we have not yet made the posting, we do not know which teachers will be involved. By the time that our revisions are provided we will have a better picture of who will attend. The provider of the professional development has not been determined at this time. Schedule, Duration, Topics The time, dates, topics for six professional development are as follows: Tuesday, November 13, 2018- 3:40-4:40- Analysis of ELLs based on ATS data/planning the first month of Title III Tuesday, November 21, 2018- 3:40-4:40- Creating content and language objectives for Title III lessons Tuesday, December 4, 2018- 3:40-4:40- Focus on acquisition of vocabulary/ planning the second month of Title III Tuesday, January 22, 2019- 3:40-4:40- Using multiple methods when assessing ELLs/Planning final month of instruction Tuesday, February 5, 2019- 3:40-4:40- Discussion of final projects for Title III program These professional development sessions will be led by a teacher to be named later. 6  Part C: Professional Development In addition to these five professional development days, which are focused on our supplemental student program, we will have one session focused on preparation for a Parental Engagement Activity. Which is as follows: Tuesday, January 8, 2019- 3:40-5:40- provided by a teacher to be named later- Only teachers involved in cross-cultural literacy night will be invited to this professional development. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Engagement Activity Many of the parents/guardians of our ELLs have expressed frustration because their children are losing ties to their native language/culture. So we have decided to create an annual literacy night specifically for ELLs. Parents/Guardians of Title III students and parents/guardians of non-Title III students will be invited to share in the festivities. Notices for the parent engagement activity will be sent in English, Spanish, and French. Teachers who are fluent in Spanish will attend the event and help translate for non-English speakers. Parents will be notified about the event through a letter sent home with students in English, Spanish, and French. Agendas, attendance sheets, and invitations in the parents' preferred language will be kept in the school's main office. The parents of our students represent many cultures and reflect the education they have received in New York and from around the world. We are developing a Cultural Literacy Night (tentative date Tuesday, January 22, 2019). Parents/Guradians of all ELLs in the school will be invited and can volunteer to bring books that mean something to them. These books can be in another language or in English. In addition, families can share clothing, food, dances, etc, that reflects their culture. The program will last three hours and will also involve games. Each teacher will set up a station involving a language game. There be a head organizer who will be assisted by four other teachers who possess TESOL or Bilingual Education licenses. January 22, 2019 3:45-6:45- Topics- World Cultures and World Literature. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session 7 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name The New American Academy Borough Bronx School Number 274 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Pepe Gutierrez Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jimena Salinas- Dual Language Teacher/Subject Area Neil Friedman-ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Yasmeen Chisolm- ENL Teacher Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez Rosario Assistant Principal Keisha Green Coach N/A School Counselor Ana Rodriguez Parent NA Parent Coordinator Jackie Pastor Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 1 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 780 Total number of ELLs 127 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.28% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) Lang. Spanish 2014-2015 Program TBE TBE TBE DL K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 1 1 1 Tot # 0 0 0 4 0 0 4 1 1 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To garner quantitative data, PS 274 uses Fountas and Pinnell and Santillana to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. The data provides us with insights about ELL students' letter and sound recognition, early literacy behaviors as well as their reading levels.   The data allows us to create and differentiate lessons for our ELLs that best meet their literacy needs. This data also guides our differentiated instruction, small guided reading groups and RTI services for ELL students.  Language and content objectives work together to help students meet common core standards. Whether these standards are met can be tracked through check for understandings between lessons and at the end of a unit. As per qualitative data, in the ENL classrooms no literacy assessments are used in the native language. However we do use the Fountas and Pinnell Sistema De Evaluación De La Lectura Grados K-2/Niveles A-N to evaluate the literacy skills of our students in the Dual Language program, as well as any Spanish dominant newcomers entering the ENL program. Students also complete writing performance assessments in their 0  home language. (Narrative, informative, persuasive). As for math, assessments are provided in Spanish for students in the Dual Language program. Dual Language teachers also use ReadyGen and other biliteracy pathways to help students acquire language by using resources from their home languages. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers take turns observing each other during "teacher rounds. Each team has a group leader that runs team meetings in which the needs of ELLs are specifically addressed. For example, the Dual Language Math Team uses Eureka Math with EngageNY (Spanish/English) to give support to Math Modules. Teachers use google drive, google classroom and the school website to work collaboratively to meet common goals. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We currently use the Fountas and Pinnell and Engage NY assessments to evaluate the success of ELLs in our school. Dual Language also uses a continuum for writing as well as iReady Diagnostics. The Math MOSL is becoming increasingly useful in tracking student growth. To further analyze student needs, teachers provide end of module assessments. The ENL team uses ELL Periodic Assessments known as the ELL Baseline Assessment to identify areas need. This data is compared against the NYSESLAT at the end of the year to measure progress in the areas of speaking, reading, writing and listening. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Structures used to address summative data include groupings for guided reading, groupings for centers, phonics groups and intervention lessons for math. Small group activities allow teachers to find trends in data and address specific needs for the students who have them. The NYSESLAT allows ELL teachers to group students by need based on progress in the areas of speaking, reading, writing, and listening. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] All ELLs are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell Bechmark Assessment System to determine literacy behaviors, abilities and reading levels. ELLs are then placed in grouping based on their level of literacy (Tier I, Tier II, Tier III). Our ELL students begin in Tier I and move into Tier II and Tier III grouping if they demonstrate a need for more targeted and intensive instruction and academic support. The extra support can occur in the classroom during differentiated small group instruction but may also take place in separate settings with supports and instruction being focused on specific learning targets based on students' individual needs. Tier I – Core Instruction in Literacy   Tier I is considered the primary level of instruction at PS 274 and always takes place in the general education classroom. Tier I involves appropriate instruction in reading delivered to all students in general education class by qualified classroom teachers. ReadyGen Common Core State Standards aligned curriculum is currently used to address all core reading and writing instruction. As needed, Common Core State Standards aligned programs such as Strategies for Writers by Zaner-Bloser, Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project and Fundations by Wilson are used to supplement core instruction and meet the needs of ELL students. Tier II – Targeted Small-Group Instruction Practices and Interventions   Tier II grouping provides small group, supplemental instruction. Supplemental instruction is provided in addition to, and not in place of core instruction received in Tier I. Instruction/interventions provided at this level/tier are designed to address the needs or weaknesses of the student relative to the reading process. ELL students in Tier II who are not making sufficient progress in Tier I will be offered supplemental small group instruction that takes place at a different time than the core curriculum instruction. Interventions are designed to match the needs of students identified as at-risk through screening and progress monitoring measures and are provided for a minimum of 20-30 minutes per session, for a minimum of 3-4 times per cycle by trained and knowledgable school personnel. Tier II supplemental reading instruction is provided in addition to ENL services to students whose first language is not English if the student has scored at the Intermediate or above levels on the NYSESLAT. Students who score below this level receive more 1  minutes of ENL services by a certified ENL/Bilingual teacher during the differentiation block. Program options available to students at this tier are based on student needs. Tier III is designed for those students who have been unresponsive to Tier II intervention or who demonstrate such significant needs that warrant intensive instruction or intervention. Tier III supplemental reading instruction is provided to students whose first language is not English if the student has scored at the transitioning or above level on the NYSESLAT. Students who score below this level (Entering or Emerging) receive more minutes of ENL services by a certified ENL/Bilingual teacher during the differentiation block. Program options available to students at this tier are based on the students' needs. Progress Monitoring   PS 274 uses Fountas and Pinnell to determine a student ’ s movement across the tiers by examining rate of progress and level of performance over time. The ENL/Bilingual teacher will also periodically assess students’ ability in the additional 3 modalities of writing, speaking, listening during ENL instruction in small groups and on a one-on-one basis based on the students’ abilities and needs. Stand alone ENL Services   Students will receive half of their ENL instruction during Stand alone services by a certified ENL/Bilingual teacher. This service will be provided in a small group setting in addition to and outside of the core curriculum instruction block. These services will be provided for minimum of 30 minutes, three to five times a week. Integrated Instruction During the Differentiation Block   ELLs will receive integrated core instruction with ENL methodology support during reading, writing, math and interdisciplinary studies. Students will be pulled for differentiated small group instruction when necessary to meet the needs of students and support their learning of core subjects and provide them with any necessary languege supports. Students will also receive ENL instruction during morning meeting sessions each morning for 30 minutes, five times a week. The four modalities, reading, writing, listening and speaking will be addressed through whole class meetings, morning message, whole group games and conversations. The emphasis however will be on speaking and listening and provide ELLs with ample opportunities to interact with classmates and practice these skills within a safe and nurturing environment. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our data analysis team uses information from our RLAT screen including information on the NYSESLAT in order to determine which ELLs to place in which program or class. We then utilize the EDAT in order to make data driven instructional decisions. For all ELLs, we analyze the NYSESLAT data to look for trends within grades and throughout the school. This helps inform decisions regarding supplemental programs and targeted interventions. For ELLs in testing grades (3-5), we additionally analyze results on the NYS ELA, Math, and if applicable Science exams. We hope to use interim assessments throughout the year to ready our students for upcoming outcome assessments. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ELL team plans on leading professional development trainings regarding the ELL Data Analysis Tool, also known as the EDAT. the EDAT is a tool that can be used as a resource when sharing information with school staff. It allows school to download three reports originating on ATS. It then organizes important information by providing a summary of the school's status and students' achievement and progress. An added benefit of the EDAT is that it allows schools to target specific programs that help ELLs. However, the EDAT can be used by our school to help improve achievement among non ELLs as well. We plan on sending tech savvy teachers to learn how to use EDAT. Part IV: ELL Programming 2  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At PS 274 our Freestanding ENL programs provide instruction in English with home language support. The focus is on English language acquisition. We utilize Integrated ENL, Stand-alone ENL, or both programs depending on the proficiency level of each individual student as determined by the initial score on the NYSITELL and subsequent annual scores on the NYSESLAT. Our school uses block scheduling. Therefore, Integrated ENL is provided for ELLs in grades K-5. Students represent heterogenous proficiency levels. The goal for our Integrated ENL instruction is to build English language skills enabling students to succeed in core content classes. Integrated ENL is delivered either by a dually certified teacher, or by a team consisting of a certified ENL teacher paired with a certified content area teacher. We service all ELLs including Former ELLs for up to two years after they've tested Commanding. Stand-alone ENL is provided for students who are considered Entering or Emerging based on NYSITELL/NYSESLAT testing. In some cases it is necessary to included Transitioning students as well. Stand-alone students are brought to a separate location from their normal daily instruction. They represent heterogenous proficiency levels and may span two grades. Stand-alone ENL is provided by a certified ENL teacher. The goal is for ELL students to develop English language skills which can be utilized in core content courses. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. At the elementary school level, Dual Language teachers provide both Integrated and Stand-alone ENL minutes to the ELLs within their classes. At PS 274 each Dual Language student receives instruction from two Dual Languge teachers. The goal of this program includes attaining balanced literacy in both English and Spanish. Students travel in blocks and alternate between their two teachers. The ELLs are grouped heterogenously by proficiency level and each grade is served separately. In 2017/2018 we will have Dual Language classes in Kindergarten, First, Second, and Third grades. In addition we use a 50/50 model. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our Dual Language program is transitioning to a 50/50 model. All students regardless of proficiency level will receive approximately 390 minutes of instruction in English and 360 minutes of Spanish on a weekly basis. ELLs with benefit greatly by this native language support. All students will receive appropriate ENL minutes based on their proficiency levels. ENL will be provided using ELA and interdisciplinary studies as content. All of our Dual Language students receive at least the minimum in Home Language Arts (1 HLA Class). In addition, all ELLs in Dual language receive at least the minimum of Bilingual Content Area Subjects as prescribed to Entering and Emerging level students (Minimum of 2). This is consistent with the CR Part 154-2 (K-8) Transitional Bilingual Education Program. The ELLs in our ENL progam receive minutes according to the level determined by the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL. Our Entering students receive a minimum of 180 minutes in stand-alone ENL and 180 with an integrated model. Our Emerging students receive a minimum of 90 minutes of standlalone ENL and at least 180 of integrated services. In total they receive 360 minutes. Our tranisitoning ELLs get either 90 minutes of stand-alone and 90 of integrated, or a full 180 minutes of integrated services. Expanding students receive 0 minutes of stand-alone and at least 180 of integrated ENL. Commanding students are 3  serviced for 90 minutes with integrated ENL methodologies. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The teachers in each grade team at PS 274 planned five interdisciplinary units (Agriculture, Medicine, Transportation, Engineering, Energy and Communication) during the summer and are now implimenting the units. During the planning process an ESL teacher was present in each team and continues to be part of the grade team both teaching and with planning throughout the year. This assures that every single teacher in any grade is receiving pedagogical ideas, strategies and therefore everyone, including the ESL teacher is well aware of all the goals for each unit and student expectations. All units include hand-on projects, developing oral language through hetergenous groupings and are geared towards explorations and building prior knowledge, especially for our ELLs. Our literacy curriculum is based on ReadyGen Reading, Writing, and Phonics, a Common Core aligned curriculum provided by the NYCDOE. Some phonics is supplemented by Fundations. Instructional approaches include realia, graphic organizers, Total Physical Response (TPR), role-playing, big books, songs, explorations, manipulatives and visuals are some of the tools and methodologies used to scaffold our ELLs' learning. The ESL teachers also take into consideration the students’ learning styles: tactile, kinesthetic, visual, and auditory. Dual language teachers also utilize ESL methodologies and strategies as they teach their students in English and Spanish using a 50/50 model. All teachers are committed to advancing our ELLs in English proficiency and DL teachers are committed to advancing students in Spanish proficiency. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Dual language teachers use Sistema de evalacion de la lectura by Fountas and Pinnell and Estrellita to evaluate native language proficiency and will administer a reading assessment at least twice a year or as necessary. This will be done in both English and Spanish. In addition, specific Performance Based Tasks, Writing Assessments, and Math Assessments are always available in the students home language. In addition, teachers read assessments for math and interdisciplinary (social studies and science) in both languages for all units. After every unit each student will complete a summative assessment in their choice of English or Spanish. .   5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status b. We recognize the demands of newly arrived ELLs and the longer-term ELLs are different and when both types of ELLs are grouped together, a variety of scaffolding methods will be employed to ensure differentiation and delivery of instruction. Specific strategies for each of the four language modalities will be taught in small groups. The ELLs will also use computers and various software to work on their listening skills specially targeting skills at hearing the beginning, middle and ending sounds. The newcomers will use software to help them decode sounds, and pronounce words as natives do. The Visual Graphic Organizers, Audio Visuals, Multicultural Resources, Alternative Assessment Instruments and other modified class work based on the level of English Proficiency are used as strategies to teach the Academic language skills to newcomers. For newcomer 4  ELLs, the instruction is focued on BICS (basic interpersonal communicative skills ), so that they acquire the basics of the langauge in order to be able to communicate in school setting and be able to express their own needs and concerns. We use TPR and a Peer-Buddy system is in place for the newcomer ELLs to feel safe, happy and belonged in a low-anxiety, stress-free learning environment. As the newcomer ELLs acquire the language and as speech emerges naturally; they will be taught CALP (cognitive academic language proficiency) by various instructional strategies. The ESL classroom will continue to feature a print-rich environment that supports the acquisition of language. This means: a word wall will be in place, strategy charts related to the current units of study will be in place. Listening centers will be in place in classrooms for ELLs. Bilingual dictionaries and picture dictionaries will be used as well. c. We look at the NYSESLAT results and have a quick intervention, which is a sustained, ongoing and deliberate targeted plan for the Developing ELLs to prevent them from becoming Long Term ELLs. The goal for Developing ELLs is to reach proficiency. To meet that goal, in addition to receiving the ENL minutes mandated by CR Part 154, we do the following: A combination of classroom inquiry like assistance is offered to the Developing ELLs to become proficient in the modality in question. The Devlopiong ELLs are provided with additional help in after school programs. The instruction is consisted of focused instruction in reading and writing. The Developing ELLs also receive intervention in the areas of reading and math. The Developing ELLs will also participate in the NYSESLAT test prep to acquire the skills needed to successfully reach proficiency io the NYSESLAT 2018. It is important for these ELLs to have the ability to practice to NYSESLAT sampler questions. d. The goal is for our Long-Term ELLs to reach proficiency and test out of the NYSESLAT. In order to meet that goal, the Long Term ELLs along with all other ELLs will participate in the NYSESLAT preparations, ELL enrichment activities in after school programs or Saturday enrichment. Many Long Term ELLs have an IEP. In these cases the ENL provider should have an opportunity to consult with each child's providers so that staff can create goals across department lines e. The plan for the former ELLs that pass the NYSESLAT is to continue to provide modified support through heterogeneous activities and utllizing them as models for current ELLs, in order to instill leadership skills and a sense of community. In addition all former ELLs in testing grades will receive all applicable testing accommodations. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? We will serve our ELL-SWDs with ENL services and native language support, as per CR Part 154 and as mandated by their IEPs. We highly differentiate instruction based on the theory of Multiple Intelligences, which accounts "for a broader range of potential in children." ENL teachers will consult with other teachers on their team who teach the same ELLs, introducing material and discussing the children’s specific needs . Eligible ELLs-SWDs are served as per their IEPs.   STRATEGIES USED BY TEACHERS OF ELLs-SWDs :   • Lessons are presented in various ways such as using music, field trips, cooperative learning and multimedia related to a student's cultural and social background.   • We also use schema building approach for academic literacy where ENL teacher of ELL- SWDs directs ELLs to preview the text before the Read-Aloud or Shared Reading. The teacher walks through the pages noting titles, paragraphs, pictures/illustrations so that ELLs can start the reading task with a general sense and feel about the story as the teacher draws the students’ attention to a more in dept analysis of the book.   • Shared reading and choral reading using various ENL methodologies are the central focus of the ENL program.   • Our school is using ReadyGen which provides cognets, which ELLs can use to transfer knowledge and make connections. Engage NY and Foss Books (science) are available in both English and Spanish.   • Guided reading & writing; graphic organizers; modeling; small groups structured conversation; poem memorization; flash cards; spelling words incorporated into reading; conferencing; circling unknown words in reading material; labeling classroom supplies/ objects in both languages; visual aids; using colors to distinguish parts of speech in modeling writing; Read Aloud, and facilitated discussions; Think Aloud; Writing Prompts.   5  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To meet the diverse needs of our ELL-SWDs within the “least restrictive environment” we work hard to be mindful of the ELL-SWDs unique needs. We try to bridge the gap between our teaching styles and their learning styles by using various strategies, prompts and material as indicated above. We have teachers and para professionals trained to Serve ELLs with Disabilities in a caring environment conducive to learning. ELL-SWDs are offered equal and appropriate access to all programs and activities at PS 274 to achieve the grade level standards. The ELL-SWDs are encouraged and assisted to have meaningful participation in all the activities along with their non-disabled peers and other ELLs during the interdisciplinary period. A resource room will also be available for all teachers to use with ELL-SWDs. We will try to meet the ELLs’ IEP goals and/or try to progress closer to achieving their goals. The ELA teacher also reinforces classroom teaching points to help ELL-SWDs with their unique needs in the “ least restrictive environment ” based on their academic, social, lingual and cultural needs. The ELL coordinator will meet with key special education personnel to target specific goals for ELLs-SWDs.   8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our school currently has at least one ENL teacher in each grade that can provide intervention. Each team/grade is responsible for scheduling their own intervention program by scheduling a certain time in the day where all teachers are providing intervention, either through guided reading or targeted strategy groups. In addition each grade has a Master Teacher that is skilled in providing intervention and works in small groups on literacy and mathematics. In Math, GoMath is used in Spanish. In ELA, Estrellita is used. Fountas and Pinnell in Spanish is also used and running records are kept for each child. Depending on the content being covered, Spanish resources are compiled and/ or created by the ENL or bilingual teacher on the team. Data is kept. Finally, our school has also provided after-school ELL enrichment to further target literacy, math, and core content areas through hands-on activities and interactive lessons. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? A specific program that is being considered involves provided parents of ELL workshops on activities they can do at home and learn alongside their child. In 2017/2018 PS 274 will utilize the ELL Periodic Assessment to determine a starting point for NYSESLAT improvements. We will be using a Reader's Theater Program developed by Teacher Created Materials during Stand-alone ENL lessons. These kits and the stories continued within offer an exciting way for our Entering and Emerging level ELLs to build fluency and generate an interest in the arts. Newcomers can concentrate on the songs and poems included with each play, and other ELLs will read parts from the plays. All ELLs will be given a consumable notebook with specific pages for every letter of the alphabet. They will use these notebooks to enter new vocabulary or known words that are difficult to spell Based on trends noted during the registration process as well as through the administering of surveys completed by parents, PS 274 is adding another grade for our Dual Language program. in 2017/2018 we will have two sections of Dual Language for grades K, 1, 2, and 3. The school is also planning to have an additional ENL teacher that can provided additional support to each grade. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently, no programs will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are always considered first for any after-school and supplemental services via mail, face-to-face, and phone communication. SCAN is an after school program offers at our school and it is made available to all students, including ELLS. Most intervention provided is 'push-in' as opposed to pulling them out of the classroom. An after school enrichment program will be offered to ELL students. This will focus on conversation and life skills that build on content covered in academic 6  classes. There will also be an after school program specifically for Newcomers that addresses print and phonetic awareness as well as cultural acclamations. We will continue NYSESLAT geared programs in the winter because a majority of ELLs in the school are at transitioning and expanding levels. We came to this determination based on the EDAT. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our school has a membership with Imagine Learning that provides a fun and interactive way of learning English through technology. Every classroom teacher also has access to a smartboard that may be used for using visuals and other interactive games and activities to assist in the instruction of ELL's. In addition, teachers in or schools use document cameras in order to project artifacts and texts easily for students. We purchased materials to assist ELLs in acquiring proficiency in core content as well as improving language skills. These materials include: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In every grade there is a teacher that is bilingual (English/Spanish) and parents are invited to come to the classroom to support ELL's transition in an ENL program. In the DL program Spanish instruction is provided 50% of the time. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. PS 274 has monthly meetings attended by the Principal, members of the IEP team, and ELL service providers. At least, one teacher from each grade level is included in these meetings to help other service providers understand the specific needs as it pertains to grade levels and ages. For example, we use thematic bilingual curriculum that explore the same topics in English and Spanish based on a grade levels. We discuss individual students and ensure that each ELL that requires services/resources is getting what they need. At the end of the school year the principal ensures that required services/resources are ordered and follows up with each Master Teacher to guarantee that each grade level has the necessary resources and support staff. One such resource is Imagine Learning, which is a series of phonics based games that modify them selves to fit each student so that the challenges they receive are within the Zone of Proximal Development, boosting their reading levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? PS 274 shares a building with a middle school (MS 229). Each school has a schedule for the use of the auditorium, and school gymnasium. Plans for the construction of a health clinic to be shared by both schools are underway. This counselors will work in this clinic and see to the socioemotional needs of our ELLs. We are fortunate to be neighbors with a state park. Roberto Clemente State Park has indoor and outdoor facilities that are at the disposal of PS 274. Chess programs, art classes, the use of a full sized gym for sporting events, tournaments, celebrations, and the use of an outdoor playground are just some of the collaborations between our school and Roberto Clemente State Park. Our school has a membership with Imagine Learning that provides a fun and interactive way of learning English through technology. Every classroom teacher also has access to a smartboard that may be used for using visuals and other interactive games and activities to assist in the instruction of ELL's. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We are awaiting the data from 2017 as well as numbers for our registration for new ELLs. Once we determine who our newly enrolled ELLs are we will create appropriate activities that would assist them. 7  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are an elementary school and currently have no language electives for ELLs. ELLs in our Dual Language program receive instruction in both Spanish and English, 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. Our model is a self-contained, by subject 50/50 model. Our EPs and ELLs are always integrated. b. Core content areas are taught 50% in English and 50% in Spanish. c. Our school uses blue for English and green for Spanish as instructional visuals for the separation of languages. d. Both languages are taught at the same time (simultaneous). Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We will have now have professional development time on Mondays after the school day ends. This time will be used primarily for grade team meetings where teachers will participate in the school’s reflective practice protocol. This meeting will be comprised of only the members of the teaching team with the exception of periodic mentor-ship from an external Reflection coach. Our Dual Language program has its own team which is led by a grade level leader and supported by our curriculum development team. Goals included analyzing student data, and developing ways to improve our established teacher rounds. Professional development for non-pedagogic staff includes topics to help our ELL population. Topics include LLI Intervention for ELLs and phonic intervention for ELLs. This professional development will be grade specific. Each grade level team has at least one ENL or Dual Language teacher. That particular teacher will need to come up with an individual plan on how to assist the teachers on their team in regards to supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Development. Topics for professional development may include how to involved newcomer ELLs, ways to improve language skills for ELLs, ways to create and fulfill language and content objectives based on common core, and how to improve Integrated partnerships. Professional Development topics for secretaries and administrators include ELL identification, Parent Notification and Information, Organizing ELL records, and Differentiating between the different ELL designations, commonly used ATS reports. For content area teachers, topics include Effective Strategies for Teaching Reading, Effective Strategies for teaching math, Common problems for newly admitted ELLs, and helping ELLs exit ELL services. CAL Solutions has been primarily how ELL personnel has received professional development at the school. ELL teachers are highly encouraged to seek and research other professional development workshops that meet their specific needs that are offered by the office of ELLs or other offices. Three ELL teachers visisted the Cervantes Institute to learn how to plan a Unit for ELL scaffolding. Our PD calendar is in the process of being finalized and will be added upon completion. 8  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Each grade level team has at least one ENL or Dual Language teacher. Those particular teachers will be responsible for ensuring that each grade level team reaches goals set by the state on ELL specific professional development. Each team devotes one or more days each week to PD related to ELLs. The topics include language acquisition, best practices for co-teaching, integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Activities include analyzing video taped lessons, researching various co-teaching models, and role-playing situations faced by ELLS. For dual language bilingual teachers, additional PD is offered in the beginning and at the end of each year. Records for professional development activities are kept by the master teacher for each grade and by the office staff. Topics included to meet the needs of ELLs include how to incorporate Newcomers in class and incorporating language acquisition into content area instruction. Our Dual Language team trains on hoe to use F & P in English and Spanish. Lastly we train all teachers on how to assist ELLs with language acquisition. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Starting in 2017-2018 PS 274 will adhere to the traditional NYC Department of Education contract. As a result we will have to revamp how we reach out to parents. Beginning this year, each grade-level teams will decide when they will schedule the 75-minute Parent Engagement and Other Professional Work. Teams can choose the day of the week and a time directly before or after school. A team may also choose to divide the time into two blocks of 40 minutes and 35 minutes. If a team cannot come to consensus, the standard Tuesday times will apply. Cluster teachers will select which grade team to serve on using a preference sheet process. This year, we began with an orientation for kindergardeners and a welcome back to school. Teachers are encouraged to use welcome calls to introduce the teachers to the parents by starting off on the right foot. Teachers also use class dojo to contact parents and keep them abreast about classroom activities. WIth this in mind, each grade will vary on when and how they will reach out to the parents of ELLs in that individual grade. The ELL coordinator will meet with each individual grade level team in September to coordinate parent outreach for ELLs across grade levels. In general we will attempt to have meetings with the parents of ELLs in the beginning and at the end of the year. Many Spanish-speaking staff members are able to translate for parents during these individual meetings. This includes teachers, paraprofessionals, the parent coordinator, and secretarial staff. The school uses DOE resources for languages not spoken by staff members. This includes utilizing the assistance of the Language and Interpretation Unit. Records of these meetings are kept in the student's cumulative record. We also attempt to meet the needs of parents by inviting them for in person meetings and by sending newsletters home. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school offers an after-school ELL enrichment program where only ELL parents are invited at the end of the program to attend a literacy workshop to help their child learn English as a new language. ELL of all grade levels are invited to attend. In addition, our school does an annual literacy night where ELL parents are specifically targeted, although it is a whole school event. Some events include Donuts of Dad, Muffins for Mom, and Literacy Night. Many Spanish-speaking staff members are able to translate for parents during these individual activities. This includes teachers, paraprofessionals, the parent coordinator, and secretarial staff. The school uses DOE resources for languages not spoken by staff members. Our parent coordinator welcomes ELL students and their parents every morning to find out about any issues. Ms Pastor works closely to predict any problems which may lead parents to transfer students and try to find solutions so that the students can stay in our 9  community.We encourage parents of ELLs to volunteer in the classroom, cafeteria, and to attend curriculum celebrations just like the parents of non-ELL students. This way the parents of ELLs can become a part of our learning community. Our parent coordinator is always on site to translate during these events. Curriculum celebrations as mentioned above occur several times throughout the year. The parents of ELLs are encouraged to attend alongside the parent of non ELLs. Each individual grade organizes curriculum celebrations in their own way. Activities include hands-on-projects, celebrations of student work/achievement, cooking and eating foods that are representative of world cultures/ student backgrounds, and games. Attending these celebrations gives parents a glimpse into the life of a student at PS 274. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Pepe Gutierrez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS274 The New American Academy School DBN: 09X274 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Pepe E. Gutierrez Keisha Green Jackie Pastor Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Neil Friedman ENL/Bilingual Teacher NA Parent Jimena Salinas- Dual Language Teacher/Subject Area Yasmeen Chisolm- ENL Teacher/Subject Area NA NA Coach Coach Ana Rodriguez School Counselor Leticia Rodriguez Rosario NA NA NA NA Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other NA Other na Other na Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 09/27/17 NA 09/27/17 09/27/17 NA NA 09/27/17 09/27/17 NA 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X274 School Name: P.S. 274 Superintendent: L. Rodriguez-Ro The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jackie Pastor Parent Coordinator No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. ATS provides us with data regarding students' home languages as per their Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) that is conducted at registration for new admits. Part III of the HLIS asks parent to choose which languages they want to correspond with school staff. ATS programs such as RCPL and RAPL show the languages that parents prefer for both written and oral communication. With this information we are able to determine the number of different languages for which we need to have translation. For our immediate translation needs, such as meeting notices or the weekly family newsletter, our in-house staff members are able to translate the majority language (Spanish). For languages that we are unable to translate here at the school or large documents we utilize the DOE’s translation services to translate. In addition, both the Parent Coordinator and School Counselor are bilingual (English/Spanish) and in each grade there is one bilingual pedagogue that can assist with oral translations. In addition we have created a report that we update regularly with the languages that parents speak by grade and class. 3  At the beginning of the 2017/2018 school year PS 274 will conduct surveys amongst staff members to determine what languages are spoken by our faculty. These employees can be called on for translation services if need be. In addition we can conduct surveys for parents to determine strengths, weaknesses, and next steps in our communication plan. Knowing how we are doing can inform what we need to fix. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic French Fulani Haitian Creole Hausa Mossi Ndebele Nepali English Slovak Spanish Twi 0 2 5 0 1 0 1 1 632 1 275 1 0 .22 .54 0 .11 0 .11 .11 68.77 .11 29.92 .11 1 1 6 1 1 1 1 0 629 0 277 1 .11 .11 .65 .11 .11 .11 .11 0 68.44 0 30.14 .11 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not Applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? monthly calendar of events and important dates Monthly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated by a bilingual member of office staff and grade-level teams 4  school-wide or grade-wide event flyers As needed throughout year parent-teacher conference announcements, Month of parent-teacher conferences after-school program information January For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. Translated by office staff, and Dual Language team, or maybe by The Big Word For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. Translated by staff on individual grades For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. Office Staff, Dual Language Team For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. enrichment packets Prior to long breaks Individual grade level teams For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. . 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Parent Teacher Conferences October and May School Staff, Parent Volunteer, Curriculum Celebrations At the end of each Interdisciplinary Unit School Staff, Parent Volunteer, For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. Annual Review/IEP Meeting Based on student School Staff, IEP team, For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. 5  For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. 1 on 1 meeting with parents of ELLs Ongoing throughout year School Staff, Literacy Night April/May School Staff, For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. For lower incidence languages in our school we will use Language Line to communicate with families. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In September 2017 the Language Access Coordinator and ELL Coordinator will meet to analyze the current roster of preferred parent correspondence. The pair will meet with the homeroom teachers of students whose parents prefer a language other than English. This group will determine on a case by case scenario how to communicate best with a parent/guardian in case of emergency. Options include call from staff members, over the phone interpretation service, use of recorded phone script in multiple languages. In addition the LAC and ELL coordinator will contact parents/guardians who had requested lower incidence language in order to determine if they still need these translation services. In some cases the parents/guardians may not need an interpreter any more. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our new Language Access Coordinator has been selected. She will attend a 2017-2018 training conducted by the Field Language Access Coordinator and turnkey information to school staff members. She will also outline which resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 6  Our new Parent Coordinator/ LAC will create a bulletin board with information translated in various languages spoken by the school community. Information on the rights of parents will be present. Letters and flyers that go home with students will be in English and Spanish and if we have an influx of families who speak another language we will translate these documents for them as well. If we encounter a situation in which parents of more than 10% of the children at our school speak a primary language that is neither English nor a covered language, we will obtain from the Translation and Interpretation Unit a translation into such language of the signage and forms required pursuant to this section and shall post and provide such forms in accordance with Chancellor’s regulations.  We will also direct families to the Department’s website where they can find information in each of the covered languages concerning the rights of parents in regards to translation services. We are aware that all notification documents can be found on the Translation and Interpretation Unit's intranet site. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We are interested in scheduling a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages to gather feedback and best practices. As a group we can decide how best to gather feedback from the parents since this is crucial in order to create better systems of communication in our building. We can also provide parents who prefer a language other than English with a survey to assess how we are doing as a school in providing with information that they need. With this survey we can pinpoint how to meet the needs of these parents in a more helpful fashion. These surveys will help us improve in the future while including present day families in meaningful dialogs. 7 
