 11X288 School Name: COLLEGIATE INSTITUTE FOR MATH AND SCIENCE Principal: FREDRICK NELSON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Collegiate Institute for Math and Science 321100011288 9 - 12 School Number (DBN): 11x288 926 Astor Avenue Bronx new York 10469 718-944-3635 Phone Number: 718-652-3525 Fax: Fredrick Nelson Fnelson2@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Fredrick Nelson Joan Medori BosswellAllen Jennifer Grant Deborah Rodriguez N/A District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza NY 10458 cstaple@schools@schools.nyc Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5834 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 9176080230 Phone Number: 718-828-7776 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Fredrick Nelson Joan Medori Allen Boswell N/A Georgia Moses EstefanyZelayea Marlon P. Henry Rose Livaglio-Miller Cleopatra John *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent student/   Name Jennifer Grant TarnashaLundy AngeliMaystry-Ramdin Stephanie Moses Deborah Rodriguez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) UFT/Teacher UFT/Teacher UFT/Teacher Parent Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The essence of our mission is to prepare our students for college and career readiness. We will achieve this by carefully analyzing our students’ performance data, we believe that we can tailor our academic programs to increase credit accumulation, Regents pass rates and college readiness for all of our students. By increasing our graduation rate and college readiness, we will support students in achieving their full human potential and prepare them to partake in and contribute to the democratic discourse in our communities and larger global society.   We also believe the most effective ways to achieve our school’s mission is through our instructional focus and instructional core. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Collegiate Institute for Math & Science (CIMS) is an academically rigorous high school established in 2003 under the New York City Department of Education. We are committed to our instructional focus and strive to demonstrate this in each and every lesson. At CIMS, students will engage in organized group discussions that require them to explain and justify their reasoning and conclusions based on pertinent evidence. We offer the traditional courses needed to achieve a high school diploma, we place particular focus on math and science education. Each student is expected to study: four years of math, including Pre-Calculus and/or Advanced Placement (AP) Calculus or Statistics, four years of science including AP chemistry and/or physics, Regents level physics and chemistry, and AP Biology. Students will also able to take courses AP Spanish Language, AP US history, AP Computer Science, and four years of social studies and English. Students are offered opportunities for off-site internships at Albert Einstein College of Medicine, NIDC (Neighborhood Initiatives Development Corporation), and earn college level credits through the College Now at Lehman College. CIMS students are exposed to various college access opportunities partnered with CBI (College Bound Initiative), the University of Vermont, Vassar College and Lehman College. We strive to provide the best academic and extracurricular programs in accordance with higher education standards to develop high-performing, ambitious, and successful student leaders. At CIMS, all academic and artistic extracurricular activities are open to all students including basketball club, Yoga, Senior Council, Student Government Association, gaming, robotics, coding, Young Men’s and Young Women’s Leadership programs and mentoring clubs. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. This year we are anticipating to house between 90 - 12 special special needs students with various learning needs. In most cases, students are labeled special education because they are learning gaps and challenges. Those students in our ENL is less than 28 students and they are sprinkled over the ENL spectrum. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In addition to our rigorous and strong course offerings, we have a number of other strengths. In our most recent Quality Review our school was rated "Well-Developed" in positive learning environment (1.4) and High Expectation (3.4). We were also rated "Proficient" in "Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1)." Some areas were significant growth was noticed was in our graduation rates, and quality of diplomas students earned for the 2017-18 academic years. For the 2017-18 academic year, we graduated 149 students, 63 of which received advanced Regents diplomas. This represented a graduation rate of at least 86%. Of the 149 graduates, 75.7% met 4-year College Readiness benchmarks. Three key areas of focus for this academic year (2018 -19) will unit planning, pedagogy and assessment. We will further develop teacher pedagogy from through the lens of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X288 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 616 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 41 43 6 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 27 16 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 71.0% % Attendance Rate 65.4% % Reduced Lunch 2.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 40.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.22 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 89% 89% 88.0% 27.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES No N/A 106 102 89.0% 5.4% 16.9% 34.3% 13.0% 2.1% 4 32% 6.6 N/A N/A 90% 88% 85.8% 53% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A review of Advance data from last academic year, shows that we need to continue to strengthen teachers' instructional capacity so that we may better serve our students. For example, less than 65% of all ratings (teacher ratings) in domain three was "developing" or "ineffective." As a result, we have decided to hone in on all areas of our instructional core, in an effort to strengthen student practice. Although we have adequate systems in place, such as Common Core aligned unit maps and effective instructional practices, we also realized that there is a need for all teachers to work collaboratively to strengthen their practice institutionally. This will strengthen our instructional foundation and further improve students outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the math team will collaboratively develop CCLS Standards aligned units of study in order to improve rigorous math instruction, resulting in a 5% (from 69% to 74%) increase in students passing the Common Core algebra I Regents. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  All teachers in this team will be organized in the form of Teachers a content teams that will meet 3-5 days per week to focus on various aspects of their unit maps.  Teachers will review existing unit maps, re-align units as needed fit and re-develop these units using a suggested template. Teachers Teachers will review students marking period assessments and use these results to refine and make revision to unit plans Teachers September 2018– June 2019 September 2018– June 2019 Assistant principal, math teachers Teachers, assistant principals September 2018– June 2019 Teachers and assistant principals N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On family night and through pupilpath, families we be made aware of the instructional unit students are working on and the common core standards that we are working on. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal, Assistant Principal, and teachers. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  By February 2019, the math team will collaboratively develop CCLS aligned units of study to improve rigorous instruction in 2 – 3 units of study in the CC Algebra Regents course and least 86% of all students taking this course will earn course credit. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) The specific unit of measures that will be used are the actual CC aligned unit maps, the results of the unit plan assessments, scholarship meeting discussions and the June 2018 Regents results in these respective areas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In order for us to meet our school-wide vision, it is imperative for us to continue to establish an environment where all students feel safe to take intellectual risk, feel comfortable to appropriately expressing themselves and seek academic support as needed. If this is the case, students are more likely to come to school and are more likely to meet the needed requirements for graduation. An analysis of our attendance data shows that there is an increased in the number and percentage of students attending school. Further analysis shows that the attendance rates for special needs students is lower than that of their general education counterparts. Last year our average annual attendance rate was almost 88%. We are working to build the systems and structures necessary to increase our rate by more than 2% (to 9%). Students are more likely to achieve credits and pass required Regents examinations when they attend school consistently. High attendance rates contribute to greater skill building and academic progress as we prepare our students for college and career readiness. Improved attendance also leads to improvements in student behavior. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result, of targeted intervention and incentives, by June 2019, there will be a 2% (from 88% to 90%) increase in our attendance rate measured by the school’s annual attendance report for the junior cohort of students. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  We will re-establish our attendance team and they will be tasked with engaging the school community to increase our overall school-wide attendance rate of the school. The attendance team will meet once per week on Thursdays to analyze student attendance for the entire school.  Home visits will be conducted by the attendance teacher for students who are absent more than five days within a month.  Guidance Counselors will conduct extensive outreach to All students, including special needs students, students who are under-credited September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Attendance teacher, guidance counselors, classroom teachers students who show decreases in attendance rates and schedule meetings with families and students who appear on the 407 list in order to ensure that appropriate actions are taken to meet the needs of each individual student including but not limited to the following: o Regular counseling o Credit recovery opportunities o Referrals to outside services or agencies Family meetings Attendance incentives will be provided to students each marking period including but limited to the following: public recognition posters posted around the school, breakfast with the principal and certificates (Platinum award=100%, Gold Award = 95%+, Silver = 90%+)  Letters will be sent to our families indicating attendance rate to date once per marking period for all students with a rate below 90%. Letters will communicate the importance of regular school attendance and cite research and statistics.  Teachers will conduct frequent family outreach to students who are struggling in class and especially to those who exhibit patterns of excessive absence. September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Attendance teacher, guidance counselors, classroom teachers All students, including special needs students, students who are under-credited 6 Staff will provide emotional support to students who have returned to school following extended absences by welcoming them warmly back into the school and make extra efforts to communicate positive messages to each child regarding his/her presence in the building. Students will be offered opportunities to attend after-school tutoring, Saturday school, and participate in Apex learning programs in order to complete tasks that will (a) assist them in reaching learning standards for their courses and (b) reduce student anxiety September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Attendance teacher, guidance counselors, classroom teachers September 2018– June 2019 Principal, Attendance teacher, guidance counselors, classroom teachers All students, including special needs students, who are under-credited All students, including special needs students, who are under-credited   3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. On a daily basis, parents will receive electronic calls when students are late or absent. Parents will also receive letters per marking period, updating them on their child's attendance. On Tuesdays, teachers will also make phone calls to parents updating them on their child's attendance. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our attendance point person will scan official period attendance daily and will review attendance report to ensure that all students’ attendance is correctly taken. She will work closely with assistant principal and guidance counselors to retrieve attendance data for students who attends school late and ensure that reversals are completed daily Once official period attendance and period attendance are scanned, the school messenger electronic system will send automated calls home to parents. Guidance counselors will also make live daily calls as well. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 7   By February 2019, there will be a 2% (from 88% to 90%) increase in our attendance rate measured by the school’s annual attendance report for the junior cohort of students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In order for us to meet our school-wide mission, it is imperative for us to continue to establish an environment where all students feel safe to take intellectual risk, feel comfortable to appropriately expressing themselves and seeking academic support as needed. If this is the case, students are more likely to come to school and hence, more likely to meet the needed requirements for graduation. An analysis of our attendance data shows that our attendance fluctuated through the year. This analysis also shows decreases in attendance for rising sophomores and juniors. Further analysis also shows that the attendance rates for special needs students are also lower than that of their general education counterparts. For the 2017 – 18 academic, our average annual attendance rate was just under 89%. We are working to cement current structures as well as implement new systems and structures that will help us to increase our rate by at least 1%. Students are more likely to achieve credits and pass required Regents examinations when they attend school consistently. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Base on our observations, teachers need continuous support in developing their understanding and instructional toolkit in all evaluative components of the Charlotte Danielson Framework. We will work to enhance the level of feedback that each teacher receives and develop professional learning communities that focuses on making student thinking visible and genuine student-student discourse across classrooms. Furthermore, by providing teachers with the appropriate structures to participate in professional collaborations, they will engage in activities that will support effective and innovative problem-finding and problem-solving activities. A review of our observational data for the 2017 - 18 academic year shows that most of our returning teachers received an effective rating overall for their measure of teacher practice (MOTP). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the Algebra II inquiry team will collectively analyze student work and marking period finals in order to improve students’ problem solving skills, as measured by a 3% (from 72% to 75%) in students passing the Common Core Algebra II Regents exam. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Department teams meet three - five times weekly during professional periods, with the support of the Assistant Principals and Principal, teachers will engage in content team lesson planning and discussion of instructional ideas that will support student-student discourse. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teaching staff September 2018 to June 2019 Teachers, Team Leaders  Staff Professional Development will be aligned to the work on teams and developed in conjunction with teacher team members, the Staff Developer, and administration All teaching staff September 2018– June 2019   Teachers will be encouraged to attend external professional development workshops specific to domain 3 of the Charlotte Danielson Framework. All teaching staff September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principals and Principal Staff Developer Teachers, Team Leaders Assistant Principals and Principal Staff Developer Teachers, Team Leaders Assistant Principals and Principal Staff Developer  Instructional teams will convene three - five times per semester to conduct targeted instructional rounds, intervisitations and learning walks.  Assistant Principals will be assigned to serve as point collaborators with each team and team leaders will meet weekly to turnkey work with Assistant Principals All teaching staff September 2018 - 2019 Teachers, Team Leaders Assistant Principals and Principal Staff Developer 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At the start of the academic year, parents will be exposed to these goals and they will be told what the expectations are to meeting these goals. Parents and students will be encourage to hold us accountable to these expectations and they will be invited to conduct parental walk through. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Observation trends  Quality Review feedback  City-wide Surveys Reports  PD team meeting agendas/minutes Teachers evaluation report scores move into effective and highly effective categories Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 75% of all students taking algebra II will earn their first semester credit, thus be on track to passing their class and algebra II Regents exam. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data tools and reports from Advance and scholarship reports, will be reviewed periodically to monitor administrator observational and teacher instructional progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Regents’ exams and credit accumulation are the two main gatekeepers for students to successfully navigate high school. Myself, our assistant principals and staff developer will work closely to support teachers in the implementation of various aspects of the Charlotte Danielson Framework so that they can further support students as they strive to earning credits and passing their Regents exams. We will consistently work closely with teachers and other staff members as they develop and deliver effective instruction. We will conduct periodic assemblies that will encourage students’ achievement by providing incentives and recognition to students who are successfully meeting certain prescribed bench marks. As mentioned before, all teachers at CIMS will be provided with opportunities to plan collaboratively and will be supported by team leaders and school administrative team. Teachers and other staff members will serve in quasi leadership roles under a distributive leadership model and will therefore contribute to the general decision making of the school. Teachers will take lead roles in planning professional development. Most activities and decision making will be made collaboratively by inquiry team, content team, professional development team, PA and SLT. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leadership will create and implement a professional development plan that will strengthen teachers’ capacity in Domain 3, resulting in 5% (60% to 65%) increase in teacher performance level in Domain 3. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Department teams meet three -five times weekly during professional periods, with the support of the Assistant Principals and Principal, teachers will engage in content team PDs, inquiry work, development of unit maps, CCLS aligned task and rubrics. Teachers and student seniors September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant principal, Principal, Guidance counselors and school programmer Assistant Principals will be assigned to serve as point collaborators with each team and team leaders will meet weekly to turnkey work with Assistant Principals Teachers and student seniors September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant principal, Principal, Guidance counselors and school programmer   Instructional Rounds team will convene twice per marking period and conduct targeted instructional rounds During content teams, teachers will meet with co-teaching counterpart to share and discuss instructional ideas that they believe will support them in questioning and discussion techniques. Teachers During Monday PD Sessions, teachers, within teams will review concrete strategies that may support them in component 3b teachers September 2018 – June 2019 September 2017 June 2019 Teachers Teachers APs and principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the year, we will share with parents our goals and plans to strengthen teachers instructional practice. We will also solicit their input and encourage them to visit our schools for walkthroughs. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  Where possible, teachers will be provided with professional development via the BFSC and our professional development (PD) committee. Each month, teachers will be given the opportunity to receive professional development based on their needs by Professional Development committee, principal, and assistant principals. Additionally, teachers will be able to meet during common planning to plan lessons, and assessments so that they can better support their students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, school leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that will strengthen teachers’ capacity on component Domain three of the Danielson’s framework, resulting in 5% (57% to 62%) increase in teacher performance level on component 3b. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Once the survey is completed, at least 90% of the staff will demonstrate whether or not we are on course to meeting our short term goals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At CIMS we will continue to work collectively to create a welcoming environment for families, students and all visitors. We have an open door policy to all parents who feel the need to visit our school. Our administrative team and guidance counselors will work feverishly to inform parents of various events and provide monthly letters of what’s happening monthly at CIMS. We will continue to strive to provide a caring community where every member of our school will be treated with care and respect. All stakeholders will be invited to attend our college fairs and other community events such college night, college fairs, award ceremonies, family night and CIMS family feast. In the same manner as the last four years, parents will be informed all events by school messenger, letters, and our school’s website. This year we will also provide parents the opportunity to take leadership positions within PA and encourage them to visit and participate in our SLT meetings. Students who are progressing ahead of their academic schedules may be given the opportunity to community services in the school. Students will also have the opportunity to work with COSA through our student government or other student related activities. Teachers will be encouraged to stand outside their classrooms during transition to encourage students to get to class and commence work immediately. Teachers, school aides and the administrative team will remain visible at all times to support school-wide operations. This year we will set time aside for grade team and content team to meet with parents of those students falling behind due to behavior and academics. Students who are falling behind will meet with our social worker to discuss student conduct, behavioral academic challenges as well as ways in which we can improve students’ academic and behavioral performance. These students will be assigned mentors and they will be encouraged to attend the school regularly, including Saturday Regents Prep Academy and participate in online academic online programs such as Apex to help students improve academically and review academic subjects. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will develop structures to strengthen parental involvement, as evidenced by an increase of 5% (from 78% to 83%) of parents who respond positively on the school survey to questions about strong Family-Community Ties. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Frequent messenger and monthly PA and SLT meetings Students and parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 PA, SLT, COSA Parents will be invited to attend attendance team meeting, guidance and when necessary grade team meetings Students and parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 PA, SLT, COSA Parents are informed about student clubs, art show, CIMS family feast and other school related activities via school website, letters, messenger and robo calls Student government elections will be conducted, award two award ceremonies. This year the school will hold family dinner and may provide gift cards to parents living in shelter through the support of school leadership team and parent teacher association that collected donations from various sources. Students and parents Sept 2018 – June 2019 PA, SLT COSA Students and parents Sept 2018– June 2019 SLT, PA and Student Government 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. There will be a team assigned to work with the student government body, PA and COSA. Per session may be available to support COSA as needed. . Contract for excellence funds, Title I and Fare student funding are used to support some of these programs as well. Fair student and Contract for excellence pay for various clubs in the school Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA C4E 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the month of February and in June 2019, COSA, AP, PA president and SLT provide a mid- year review that discuss whether short and long term goals were met. We may conduct a qualitative study by interviewing parents and students whether goals are met and what they expect for 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. During the month of February and in June 2019, COSA, AP, PA president and SLT provide a mid-review that discuss whether short and long term goals were met. We may conduct a qualitative study by interviewing parents and students whether goals are met and what they expect for 2018. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Class pass rate and transcript data, Apex Class pass rate and transcript data, Apex Class pass rate and transcript data, Apex Class pass rate and transcript data, Apex N/A Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Regents prep, Saturday school, peer tutoring Regents prep, Saturday school, peer tutoring Regents prep, Saturday school, peer tutoring Regents prep, Saturday school, peer tutoring N/A Peer Tutoring and one on one tutoring Peer Tutoring and one on one tutoring Peer Tutoring and one on one tutoring Peer Tutoring and one on one tutoring N/A During school day, Saturdays and after school During school day, Saturdays and after school During school day, Saturdays and after school During school day, Saturdays and after school N/A Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Tutoring, counseling support, after school clubs. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 3 3 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9 Counseling, tutoring, additional school related materials such note books, pens and pencils 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $600 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. This past year most teachers were screened through a face-to-face interview, demo lesson with students, students’ feedback/debrief session. We have started and will continue to support teachers by encouraging them to attend workshop. Teachers of advanced placement (AP) subjects will attend advanced placement institute as well to provide additional professional development support. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our internal PDs are reviewed by the principal and PD team. Our PD team designs PDs that address the implementation of common core standards, school-wide literacy plan and the Charlotte Danielson framework Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 1  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Regarding professional develop sessions, teachers were surveyed to determine their perceived need for professional development activities, especially around the use of Charlotte Danielson Framework. After reviewing our student data, PPO and Advance data, the PD team works in conjunction with me and the staff developer, to determine layout and objectives for our professional development. With respect to assessments, teachers will be encouraged to work in their content teams to create standard aligned assessments and corresponding rubrics that similar in content and expectations to what students will encounter on state examinations 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 426541 0 0 0 X Column B Section Reference(s) Pages 9, 10, 11 – 13, 16 – 19, 21 and 25 2  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 3620363 X Pages 9, 10, 11 – 13, 16 – 19, 21 and 25 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 3  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Collegiate Institute for math and science, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students [Collegiate Institute for math and science] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 6  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Collegiate Institute for math and science, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 7  ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 8  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 9  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Collegiate Institute for Math and Scienc Borough Bronx School Number 288 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Fredrick Nelson Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Grace-Ann Fogah Teacher/Subject Area John Hesse/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Kyle McCabe//SS Related-Service Provider Ms. Tosciano/ Ms. Schif Superintendent Caron Staple Assistant Principal Kim Pyant Coach N/A School Counselor Cari Perez Parent Parent Coordinator Leslie Martinez Field Support Center Staff Member Wladimir Pierre Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 602 Total number of ELLs 14 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 2.33% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year 0 0 0 0 0 0 Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our school uses the NYSESLAT and ELA Regents exams as a baseline assessment of students' levels. Continuing assessments throughout the year using the ELA Regents rubric helps drive instruction. Student weaknesses are identified and targeted interventions are used to address these areas. These areas are shared with content area teachers in our professional development sessions. Members of our Professional Development team have exposed strategies to all of our teachers in an effort to help our ENL students. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2  There are daily department meetings in which all these assessments and data are examined. Additionally, co-teachers meet on a regular basis to examine student work and discuss next steps. Students needs are also assessed during the inquiry process and a plan is implemented to address the areas of deficiencies. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We will utilize the AMO tool in order to make decisions about instruction in our ELL classes and across content areas. This tool will assist us in identifying students who are making limited progress. Once these students are identified, conversations and monitoring can take place with our counselors, teachers, and parents in order to create realistic working goals around targeted areas of need. Our goal is to implement uniform assessments across disciplines in order to evaluate student work and progress. This will offer teams the ability to collaborate on research based instructional practices that will support struggling learners. During the inquiry cycle, we can evaluate how students are responding to the interventions and appropriate next steps that will assist the students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? For developing students, formal assessments are used to determine each students' strengths. They are offered after school and Saturday school tutoring. All Long term ELLs have IEPs and are in an ICT setting. Both Special education and ENL teachers provide support in these classes. They are offered after school and Saturday tutoring. Former ELLs continue to receive support from the ENL teacher for two years and their testing modifications as per CR Part 154. Tasks and materials are differentiated as needed. Students are in main stream classes with all other students. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] NA 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. ELA and content teachers use their respective Regents exam results as a basis of inquiry work. NYSESLAT results showed progress for the majority of our ELLs . Our ELLs with IEPs have shown inconsistent progress. They have struggled mostly with the listening and reading sections. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? NYSESLAT and Regents exams results are shared with teachers at the beginning of the year and after the results of the new administration of exams are released. This data is used to help make adjustments in programming and classroom instruction. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our students are all in a freestanding ENL program. Students are grouped together for freestanding ENL class (across proficiency levels and grade levels.) Integrated classes are grouped by grade levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. 3  Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Several students receive ENL instruction in the stand alone ENL class every day. All students receive integrated teacher in ELA and content area classes every day, 45 minutes per day. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content area instruction is delivered in English. ELL's have access to after school and Saturday school tutoring in content areas. Instruction is differentiated in order to reach all students. ELL's have access to bilingual dictionaries in all classes. Entering and emerging students have access to materials in Spanish if needed. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? When state test are given our ESL coordinator, testing coordinator and IEP coordinator collaborate in order to ensure proper testing implementation is considered. Upon arrival, students are given the option of taking the LAB-R in their home language if they choose. Students also have the option of take the LOTE in their home language. ELL's are programmed for Spanish classes and are encouraged to take the LOTE exam and to continue with AP Literature and AP Language. Native speakers of Spanish are programmed for Native Language class. We currently do not have the ability to evaluate students in any other language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups in the following ways: A. For SIFE, we focus on strengthening language and instruction in a comfortable environment while at the same time introducing students to school life. This usually involves pairing up students with a buddy who speaks the same native language. . B. Newcomers are also given a buddy who will help them to adjust to American schools. Depending on the students' strengths and proficiency level, texts may be provided in the native language. ENL teacher provides support, socially as well as academically. For example, norms for behavior and interactions with staff might be very different. C. For developing ELL students, formal assessments are used to determine each student's strengths. They are offered after school and Saturday school tutoring. Graphic organizers, sentence starters, outlines and visuals are some additional resources that are used to help improve skills. D. Our long term ELL students are in a small setting in ELA class. Since most also have IEPs, a licensed special education teacher also provides support. They are also offered after school and Saturday tutoring. E. Former ELLs' continue to receive support from ENL teachers for two years and their testing modifications as per Part 154. Tasks and materials are differentiated as needed. Students are in main stream classes with all other students. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use a variety of strategies including graphic organizers, sentence starters, videos, photos, text chunking, jigsaw reading, guided reading and writing templates. Students are encouraged to explore language and we try to create a stress free environment in our classrooms where students are free to make error and self-correct as they increase their proficiency. Smart boards also provide support via videos and translations. Students are encouraged to work in groups and 4  discuss topics with each other to enhance their speaking skills and content knowledge. Visual aids and manipulative are used as used to help improve language and understanding of what is being taught. Individualized instruction and small groups instruction are also implemented in the classroom. A.P. for ESL/Special Education, ENL teacher and guidance counselors review the list of ELL students with and without IEPs to ensure that all students are properly programmed according to the CR Part 154 and their IEPs (if applicable). Students are programmed for either the ENL standalone program or the ELA/ENL ICT program or both. At the present, we do not have any ELL SWDs that require a bilingual program. For students whose IEPs dictate that the language of service should be their native language (i.e. Spanish) an alternate placement paraprofessional is paired up with those students to provide translation services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Instruction is differentiatled by using various grouping strategies and individualized instruction whenever necessary. Students skills are assessed on an ongoing basis. Student work, assessment information and progress reports from teachers are used to determine if SWDs can be given a flexible program. Students who are making progress in specific content areas are considered for flexible programming. Consultation with the IEP team along with the students are parents are first and foremost a part of the process. Students may be slowly integrated into 1 or 2 ICT classes if they are in a self-contained program. As students progress, it is the plan to place students in the least restrictive environment according to the needs of the student. Our school ensures that students are with non-disabled peers as much as possible. They are programmed to attend their elective classes with peers who do not have disabilities. Based on teacher recommendations, assessments past and present and students' IEPs are used to place ELL SWDs in ICT classes. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our ENL students are in an integrated teaching setting for ELA with the goal of improving reading and writing skills across content area classes. Texts in the content classes are available to students in Spanish. ENL teacher reinforces concepts and skills in the stand alone class. There are both after school tutoring and Saturday tutoring for Regents Preparation. The school has created a literacy plan that will be incorporated into the school wide plan. For math and science, texts are available in Spanish. Spanish and English dictionaries and glossaries are available. They are offered multiple entry points to access the curriculum. Additionally, vocabulary definitions and examples are given to the students prior to the lesson in math and Social Studies. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have implemented an ELA/ENL push in model as well as an ELA/ENL/Integrated class. We are hoping to also have more push in services in a variety of content areas where needed. . 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs have access to all campus wide PSAL teams as well as after school clubs. Students are afforded time in a half on all assessments and exams. If they are unable to complete their work during class time, content teacher will afford additional time for students to complete their work. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. ENL and ELA teachers work together to create appropriate unit plans for the ELLs. Students have access to technology for Regent preparationand to help improve listening, speaking and reding skills. Smart boards are available in most class rooms which allows teachers to access information and or for access to visual aides quickly. Texts are chosen based on their 5  suitability for certain levels. Students have access to English as well as translation dictionaries. Teachers update Skedula regularly, which allows techers to communicate with student and parents and vice-versa. Student grades, attendance and anectdotals about student behavior and academic progress are available at all times. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language support is a paramount concern especially for students labeled as SIFE; these students are programmed to receive instruction daily to help them to improve their skill development. Much of this curriculum is aligned with the ENL and ELA classes in order to ensure comprehension, vocabulary acquisition, and foundational writing skills. Native language support is critical in the overall development of students’ second language skills. The Spanish NLA class teaches skills that can be transferred to English for example- the use of context clues. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENL students' schedules are programmed to correspond to their age and achievement level. This data will decide student programming for the year. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? ENL and ELA teachers work together to create appropriate unit plans for the ELLs. Students have access to technology for Regent preparation and to help improve listening, speaking and reading skills. Smart boards are available in all class rooms which allows teachers to access information and or for access to visual aides quickly. Texts are chosen based on their suitability for certain levels. Students have access to English as well as translation dictionaries. Teachers update Skedula regularly, which allows teachers to communicate with student and parents and vice-versa. Student grades, attendance and anecdotal about student behavior and academic progress are available at all times. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have ENL parents meeting in addition to the parent/teachers conferences. Newly arrived ELLs are paired with current or former ELL students who serve as buddies. We also have a student/teacher buddy system in place to help students adjust to their transition to high school and new country. ENL teacher Ms. Torrente, AP for ENL and Principal Nelson are all in attendance. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish as a foreign language 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 6  ENL teacher. ELA teachers and AP will frequently attend ENL professional development meetings in and/or outside of the school. They along with the special education teacher will have common planning time. Teachers will meet in grade teams and subject teams throughout the year. When ENL teacher attends professional development, she will then turn key new ideas and strategies to the staff for implementation in the classroom. The ENL teacher is attending professional development sessions which are offered through the DOE. These sessions have been on writing argumentative and literary responses. The Professional Development sessions will help teachers to identify and address specific areas of deficits the ELL students are facing such as understanding and incorporating academic vocabulary. Teachers can attend DOE workshops offered by the Office of English Language Learners. The PD calendar for the year has not been fully developed at this time. The paraprofessionals that provide language services to our students will attend professional development sessions outside of school as they become available. ENL teacher will also collaborate with these personnel to share strategies and supports that are beneficial to students who yet need language services. The guidance counselors and secretaries will also attend professional development workshops to better understand the requirements for ELL services as well as relative information for the intake process and graduation requirements. Our school does not have a bilingual school psychologist nor do we have a parent coordinator. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL coordinator and other content teachers of ELL students will attend the workshops and turn-key information to the staff in an effort to improve student outcomes in our ELL department. The school wide professional development will address the needs of ELL students. Our ENL teacher along with our Professional Development team will run workshops with the focus on our ELL population on on-going basis. An agenda identifying the Professional Development with a short synopsis of the training will be kept in the office of the Staff Developer for our records. This will help us to monitor the appropriate time allotted for ELL-specific professional development. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? There will be 4 meetings this school year. October ENL parents meet and greet December - Graduation requirements and Curriculum night March - NYSESLAT meeting and meet with the teacher meeting June - Family Day The school will provide written translated materials by using its outside vendor translating service and sending all parent notification documents to said service to be translated two weeks before the correspondence is scheduled to be mailed. The school will also follow up by sending out a phone message in the appropriate languages to make sure the parents received the notification via mail. For Spanish translation, our Spanish language and literature teachers will assist us with translation, both written and oral. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ENL Parents are invited to all School wide meetings as well as any special workshops conducted by the school. We will have 4 separate meetings that are geared towards the ENL populations (please see above). Our ENL parents also participate in our College and Career meeting and any other meetings our school hosts. At this time, we do not have a parent coordinator who coordinates meetings with our parents. Our ENL teacher coordinates the parent orientation and additional meetings with our ELL parents. At the present, our school secretary, two of our foreign language teachers translate for us in Spanish and one of our science teachers translates for us in Bengali. Signs concerning needing translation services are posted in our main 7  office. Our school is also aware of the DOE translations services hotline that can be used to translate and interpret messages into the native language of the parent. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Fredrick Nelson, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Colleg Inst for Math and Scien School DBN: 11X288 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Fredrick Nelson Title Principal Kim Pyant Assistant Principal Leslie Martinez Parent Coordinator Yvonne Torrente ENL/Bilingual Teacher John Hesse Parent Teacher/Subject Area Kyle McCabe Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Cari Perez Caron Staple Wladimir Pierre Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 N/A 1/1/01 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11288 School Name: Colleg Inst for Math and Sci Superintendent: Caron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Derrick Harrison Assistant Principal No No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Survey is administered to parents of ENL students immediately. This information is then entered in ATS. We review the reports in ATS to ensure that we are communicating with parents in their preferred language. Additionally, our school sends home a language preference sheet to parent and these responses are also used to determine our next steps. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Hindi, Italian, Nahuatl, English, Pilipino, Spanish, Urdu, Ukrainian, and Vietnamese Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable 32, 13, 27, 2, 3, 2, 1, 1, 679, 3, 173, 8, 2, 12 3.34, 1.36, 2.82, 0.21, 0.31, 0.21, 0.1, 0.1, 70.56, 0.31, 18.06, 0.84, 0.21, 1.25 31, 14, 27, 2, 3, 2, 1, 1, 676, 3, 176, 8, 2, 12 3.24, 1.46, 2.82, 0.21, 0.31, 0.21, 0.1, 0.1, 70.56, 0.31, 18.37, 0.84, 0.21, 1.25 Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Student Handbook September 07, 2017 Parent Notification Letter September 07, 2017 Parent Meet and Greet NYSLESLAT Score report September 15, 2017 Parent Teacher Conference Regents Invitations Documents not in English will be translated by staff members within our school who speak, read and write the language. All other languages will be translated through an organization that can translate into the appropriate language. Additionally, DOE letters will be printed in the appropriate languages provided. All other languages not available will be translated via 2  Parent Teacher Conference/NYSESLAT letter Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable October 23, 2017 January 5, 2018 February 16, 2018 April 16, 2018 Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We will use the staff in our school that speaks the preferred language and hire personnel to translate. ENL Parent Orientation September 15, 2017 Parent information session October 23, 2017 Parent Meeting February 16, 2018 Parent Meeting Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable April 16, 2018 Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable Not applicable 3  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Staff members who speak the preferred language will communicate the emergent message. For those languages for which we do not have the personnel to translate for, we will use the interpretation services to communicate with parents. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff members will receive training on the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. Our Parent Coordinator has attended the training and our ENL teacher along with the ENL supervisor will attend training and turn-key information to staff members to ensure that we meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All staff in the main office were trained by our school. All documents listed above are located in the main office and parents that walk into the building can point to the language they speak and we will readily get translation services on the line if no one on-site can translate for them. We have staff members that we utilize as liaisons when parents come in and the main office is informed to call one of the assistant principals or the ESL teacher when they need help. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During our 4 designated ENL parent meetings we will conduct a survey. We will ask parents to fill out a quick feedback card when visiting for various reasons (conferences with guidance counselors, attendance meetings, return from suspension.) These feedback cards can be filled out in their native language. We will seek feedback from our students as well. 4 
