2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X297 School Name: MORRIS ACADEMY FOR COLLABORATIVE STUDIES Principal: MATTHEW MAZZAROPPI 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies 320900011297 9-12 1110 Boston Road Bronx, NY 10456 School Number (DBN): 09x297 718-893-7368 Fax: Mmazzaroppi2@schools.nyc.gov 718-617-5312 ext 2361 Phone Number: Matthew Mazzaroppi School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: Matthew Mazzaroppi Jordan Chamoff Vivian Mahadeo-Lopez Jessica Fernandez SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Tonya Perkins Mejreme Musaj Ashley Perez Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Anna Falkovich District Information Geographical District: 09 Richard Cintron Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue New York, NY 10001 Superintendent’s Office Address: Rcintro@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (212) 356-7518 Phone Number: 718-281-7519 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandria Anormaliza Executive Director: Alexandria Anormaliza aanormaliza@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 935-5618 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Matthew Mazzaroppi Jordan Chamoff Vivian Mahadeo-Lopez Tonya Perkins Mejreme Musaj Ashley Perez Anna Falkovich Carla Smart Benjamin Cruz Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Sharon Butler Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/ Student Member/ Student Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Our Mission: At Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies (MACS) We believe the most effective way to realize our vision is through projects-based learning, a series of data-informed, student-centered initiatives that meet student needs, and socio-emotional support for students. Project assignments flow in and out of these systems as a connective thread that increases academic rigor for all students and provides opportunities for instruction to be relevant to students’ lives as we provide socio-emotional support. We strive to always follow our motto: Students First 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies is one of 4 schools located in the Morris High School Campus. We are located in the Morrisaina section of The Bronx. Our school is located in one of the poorest congressional districts in the country and our zip code has been deemed the hungriest zip code in the country. Our students face severe economic hardships. We serve grades 9-12 and we have a total of 426 students. Approximately 85 percent of our students receive government assistance and currently 35 of our students are in temporary housing. Our current year to date attendance data for this school year is 82 percent. 71 percent of our students are Hispanic or Latino and 27 percent of our students are Black or African American. We have recently become a Community School one of the Mayor’s and Chancellor’s Community School initiatives to meet the socio-emotional needs of our students and to battle these hardships. Through Community School initiatives we have created a comprehensive plan of support for students and parents that focuses on mentoring, mental health services, extended academic support and parent and student leadership. We have partnered with the following organizations: Columbia University, the Yankees, and Robotics: We have an 8 year tradition in our partnership with Columbia University where students build a robot assigned a specific task to compete with teams from around the world. The work happens at Columbia where our students work in partnership with Columbia students. We have a successful record in Robotics in a highly competitive environment and are consistently honored on the field by the New York Yankees for our accomplishments. Junior Reserve Officer‘s Training Corps Program: Led by experienced military personnel, our J.R.O.T.C program continues to thrive as a student leadership program where students, through character development and mental and physical training, seek to serve our community well. The current J.R.O.T.C team has been awarded several trophies this year in drill and inspection competition. New Visions: Affinity support and coaching for school leaders and teams across content areas and specialties. Teachers College – Center for the Professional Education of Teachers (T.C - C.P.E.T.): Continuing a 5 year partnership with TC Consultant from TC C.P.E.T supports the development of our teacher leaders and administrators. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  CUNY-New York State Initiative for Emergent Bilinguals (N.Y.S.I.E.B): To support the needs of our emerging bilingual population, we were selected as a partner in the CUNY-N.Y.S.I..EB state funded program that provides a 3 year customized plan to develop systems and support structures for engaging students who are learning English. Montefiore Medical Center: After a multi-year collaboration, we’re thrilled to host the Health Center in the basement of the Morris Campus where students and families can receive professional health care. Arts Connection: Through a Violence Prevention Grant we continue our partnership with Arts Connection to bring visual arts to our students and to incorporate this artwork into our projects- based learning systems. Theater for a New Audience (T.F.N.A.): Continuing a 5 year partnership with T.F.N.A, we have paired Common Core aligned curriculum with rich, theater-going experiences and play writing projects where student plays are performed by professional actors. Last year they named us School of the Year for our collaborative efforts to bring the arts to our students. Dreamyard : From Step to Spoken Word Poetry we revitalize the arts in our school with professional teaching artists who work with our students to find their voice and form connections Morris Academy Mentors: With Hope for New York as a partner we continue our long running Morris Academy Mentors program. Students are partnered one-on-one with New York City professionals and attend workshops and field trips while building life skills. In addition, this year we have been selected to receive a 4-year Community Schools Grant awarded by the New York City Department Of Education and United Way, and in turn, we selected the Center for Supportive Schools (C.S.S) as the Lead Community-Based Organization supporting us in the endeavor to become a Community School. We will focus on C.S.S ’s Peer Group Connection (P.G.C) Program: an evidence-based program that supports students’ successful transition from middle to high school - by tapping into the power of older students to create a nurturing environment for incoming students. P.G.C enables schools to put into place a leadership course for credit that trains older students to become peer leaders who facilitate weekly sessions for small peer groups of first-year students, thereby contributing to a safe, supportive, engaging, and inspiring school environment. In addition to these needs we have identified other priority needs for this school year. Struggling attendance hinders students’ credit accumulation especially in the 10th and 11th grades. To address this issue we have included various attendance initiatives and students and family supports to promote higher attendance. Also our instructional focus will be to increase our students’ ability to write with evidence and new math support by sound reasoning. This is a requirement to Math Common Core Standards. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At present our student population consists of some English Language Learners at different skill levels. Currently we have 4 Entering, 17 Emerging, 23 Transitioning, 35 Expanding, 18 commanding. We have 11 current Students with Interrupted Formal Education (S.I.F.E) English Language Learners and 7 S.I.F.E former English Language Learners. Since we have a wide variety of English Language Learners at different skill levels, we have partnered with CUNY N.Y.S.I.E.B and hired additional personnel to address their needs in language acquisition. Our Special Education population has classifications from Learning Disability, Other Health Impairment (physical disability), Attention Deficit Hyperactive Disorder, Attention Deficit Disorder, Emotional Disturbance, Intellectual Disability, Multiple Disabilities and Speech or Language Impairment. The settings offered at MACS to ensure that all students receive the Least Restrictive Environment (LRE) are the following: Self Contained (grades 9 and 10 to transition students), Integrated Co-Teaching (I.C.T) (all grades), and Related Services only (students who only receive speech or counseling). We have also restructured our programming to allow us to provide students with instructional supports more consistently and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  deliberately planned via content literacy classes and reading electives. Our students with disabilities and their needs have required that we hire additional personnel and to leverage current partnerships for training and increased resources. We will continue to address their needs through flexible programming and individualized programming as well. Currently we have 35 students who are in temporary housing. Each of these students are given supplies and all of these students have the opportunity to participate in our Student Ambassador program where students work within the school with staff members and receive payment for their service. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The elements of framework for Great Schools in which our school has made the most progress over the past year are Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teaching, Supportive Environment, Effective School Leadership and Trust. We were rated Excellent in Rigorous Instruction, Good in Collaborative Teaching, Good in Supportive Environment, Good in Effective School Leadership, Good in Trust and Good in Student Achievement. As noted in our Quality Review feedback, we received a Well Developed in both teacher teams and curriculum development. We utilized inquiry focus team categories aligned to the categories on the Quality Review rubric, department teams and specialty teams which is the School Implementation Team (S.I.T) and the Principal Advisory Council (P.A.C) to systematically revise our curricula and implement it along with varied assessments through a series of Professional Development cycles and Design Your Own (D.Y.O) periodic assessments. Areas of focus for this school year are improving the supportive environment within our school and supporting our community and we will attempt to do this by building stronger families and community ties. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X297 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 401 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 30 9 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 4 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 90.3% % Reduced Lunch 17.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.2% 68.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.74 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 73% 57% 69.7% 1.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 183 175 84.0% 4.0% 27.7% 28.7% 1.5% 0.5% 4 42% 6.6 N/A N/A 67% 58% 75.0% 14% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. SUMMARY OF STRENGTHS: The school leader along with the Principal Advisory Council proposed and was awarded a grant to become one of the 45 Community Schools in the N.Y.C.D.O.E. The grant will allow for the school and its community to support the initiatives below and develop new initiatives that improve social – emotional supports for students and the entire community. Explicitly High Expectations Panels and Round-tables: Teachers, Students, Parents, and School Leaders all come out for Panels and Round-table project presentations. These events develop students’ presentation skills and showcase their work in progress as well as their final products. Through their personal experiences and the observation of others, the school is able to set explicitly high expectations and publicly reward students who meet these expectations. Bulletin Board Bonanza: More than twice a semester, teachers and students collaborate to create the best bulletin board presentation they can in the Bulletin Board Bonanza (an event that mixes the best samples of student work, the most improved work, and a little friendly competition to create a showcase of instructional, relevant and visually 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  engaging display boards.) Teachers design assignments and rubrics, give detailed feedback, and reflect. Students are in charge of the work and creating the boards. The event is a celebration of student work. Specific Initiatives: Our Support Our Seniors program matches seniors with teachers so teachers can monitor their students’ progress toward meeting the expectations of graduation and college and career readiness. Skedula Progress Reports and Pupil Path convey high expectations to parents and students, and monthly attendance initiatives designed and facilitated by our attendance team also convey high expectations for targeted students around attendance goals. IMPACT: Each of these systems has increased awareness of and proficiency in meeting high expectations. Our projects and student work have become more rigorous, and the teaching staff collaborates more often to meet these high expectations. It is evident in the quality and turn-in rate of Professional Development deliveries. Students feel the need to work hard to get good grades as evidenced in our School Culture Survey, and parents have shown approval in various forms of feedback regarding the expectations placed on their students. Partnering with Families Parent Outreach: In addition to the systems involving parents mentioned above and in alignment with the N.Y.C D.O.E’s focus on increasing parent engagement, MACS has leveraged our professional learning time for dedicated parent outreach. With the leadership of our new Parent Coordinator, our teachers and staff members are increasing our outreach and services for parents and families. Through letters, phone calls, Pupil Path, email and parent conferences teachers and families are in contact more now than ever before. Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies has a fully formed School Leadership Team (S.L.T) as well as a Parent Association who provides insight and guidance on school initiatives and decision making. We understand that not all parents are able to serve on school teams so we’ve set up Parent Surveys for parents and families to voice their thoughts and ideas. Survey results are shared publicly, and they inform adjustments to our systems and structures. Mentoring Program: Through strategic partnerships, MACS hosts the Morris Academy Mentors in association with Hope for New York that pairs MACS Students with volunteer mentors (N.Y.C professionals) who meet their students on Saturdays on a monthly basis, attend field trips and workshops, and provide personal support as well as insight and exposure into a variety of professional fields. IMPACT: Parents have more of a voice than before, and they influence school decisions. We increased our Extended Day and Saturday School offerings, we revised a C.E.P goal, and we moved the Parent Association meeting times upon parents’ requests. Their expectations grew as they learned about and were included in our high expectations systems. College and Career Readiness Counseling & College Exposure: We work hard to educate our students to be ready for college in academics and real life skills. To this end, we have dedicated guidance counselors, one being our Senior Adviser, a Graduation Team, and a College Counselor, who regularly give students feedback on their paths to graduation, take students on college trips, provide access college readiness courses like At Home in College C.U.N.Y English, C.U.N.Y Math, College Now, Advance Placement US History Programs, and bring speakers and workshops to our student population and parents. We have also posted student progress via Skedula on our hallway walls so that seniors and supporters can easily reference the data and have a conversation. Freshman Focus and Academic Awards : Because college and career readiness is about a culture of excellence and aspiration, we’ve dedicated resources to pour into our Freshman Focus team as well as providing positive reinforcement events for students who are meeting or exceeding expectations including Honors Night, the Stars Breakfast, Round-tables, and reward trips. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  IMPACT: Because of consistent feedback and high expectations for a college and career ready culture, attendance and participation in college-related events like our S.U.N.Y Lock-in and Homecoming 2018-19 is solid, and the students work through the college application process with enthusiasm. Also, more students are hitting college ready benchmarks than in the past. PRIORITY NEEDS : Though We received a Proficient in 3.4 of the Quality Review 2017-2018, we see the need to promote a high level of engagement fueled by high expectations with our senior class so they finish strong and reach their goals. We will continue to to work towards the following items: Increase graduation rate   Continue to develop programs that will increase student attendance  Identify and bring in additional personnel supports to help address students’ social-emotional needs. Teacher Collaboration: Though we received a Well Developed in 4.2 of the Quality Review 2017-2018 which is to engage in structured professional collaborations in teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning - we continue to build trust among our teachers. This decision is informed by the Learning Environment Survey.  Continue our partnership with the Center for Supportive Schools to provide socio-emotional support to incoming freshmen class in the form of a peer mentoring program.  According to our attendance data (Year-to-date attendance reports) for our current seniors’ attendance is imperative: 75% attendance, 13% lateness.  College Readiness trends of our ? School Quality Snapshot reveal that approximately 25% of our students hit the college ready benchmark in English Language Arts (ELA) while very few hit the Math benchmark. Therefore we have implemented double periods of Math and we have hired a new Assistant Principal with a Math background. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By August 2019, we will increase our 4 year graduation rate by 2% as measured by August 2019 ATS Graduation Cohort School Reports (RCOS.) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Strategies to address the needs of English Language Learners: Cohort 2018 November Administrators  Peer Collaborative Teacher – Department of Education (DOE) initiative for lead teachers to coach content area teachers to improve instruction. 2018 - January 2019 Counselors Teachers  Department Initiatives and I.C.T structures - departments meet to align norms and the SpEd Department and ESL Department advise content area departments on strategies of scaffolding for high needs students.  CUNY - N.Y.S.I. E.B -partnership that promotes trans-languaguing and other strategies to support ELLs.  Trans-languaging Strategies to address the needs of Students with Disabilities:  Peer Collaborative Teacher – Department of Education (DOE) initiative for lead teachers to coach content area teachers to improve instruction.  Department Initiatives and I.C.T structures - departments meet to align norms and the SpEd Department and ESL Department advise content area departments on strategies of scaffolding for high needs students. Strategies to address the needs of All Students:  Saturday School Support - extended tutoring for senior and other students who struggle in various content areas.  Grade Team Initiatives - Graduation Team  Support Our Seniors - teachers mentoring seniors on the path to graduation.  Peer Collaborative Teacher – Department of Education (DOE) initiative for lead teachers to coach content area teachers to improve instruction.  Department Initiatives and I.C.T structures - departments meet to align norms and the SpEd Department and ESL Department advise content area departments on strategies of scaffolding for high needs students. September 2018- Programmer Data Specialist June 2019 Team Leaders January 2019 - June 2019 Department Leaders College Advisers CUNY AT Home Coordinator College Now September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Marking Periods 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Raising College Awareness (Trips, Admissions, College-going culture) – N.Y.U College counselor provides college incentives to improve student engagement.  CUNY - N.Y.S.I. E.B -partnership that promotes trans-languaguing and other strategies to support ELLs. Flexible individualized Scheduling  Programs, professional development and/or systems and structures needed to impact change:  Reward Programs (STARS Breakfast) – students maintaining high G.P.As (Grade Point Averages) are rewarded with Breakfast.  12th Grade Alignment with CCSS - curriculum aligned with partnership with CUNY at Home  CUNY At Home in College Curriculum – CUNY support of rigorous curriculum to support literacy skills of seniors.  College Now  Students re-take the Regents to get a minimum score of 75 - schedule an Extended Day support aligned with College readiness goals  Department Initiatives  Transcript Reviews with Guidance - regular meetings supporting students toward graduation  Reward Programs (Honors Night) Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change  School Leaders are committed to communicating expectations to teachers, holding them accountable, and providing the ongoing support that is required in order to improve staff members’ professional practice.  Expectations around curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment are shared with faculty at the beginning of the school year.  We have a "learning partners" initiative to promote peer collaborative learning and hold students accountable for group work, which has been articulated to teachers via professional learning sessions and teacher team meetings.  We partner with the Center for the Professional Education  of Teachers (C.P.E.T) at Teachers College Columbia to provide teachers with support in meeting expectations through professional learning sessions. School leaders collaboratively monitor data from instructional walks and teacher observations so they can assess the level at which the initiatives are being implemented school wide.  Morris Academy Collaborative Studies (MACS) organizers for students delineate expectations for which students are held 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  accountable on a path toward college and career readiness and are encouraged to set goals that are college and career related. Students are expected to carry their organizers with them and set end-of-year, marking period, and weekly goals so that they can see the improvement in their work over time to ensure that they are making progress toward graduation and college preparedness. Students understand that part of their participation grade requires that they come to class prepared with their organizers and that teachers and advisers review students’ goals with them. Rigorous Instruction and Curricula  Across classrooms, teaching practices are aligned to the school’s articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best, through the use of student-centered strategies to engage all learners in high-level, collaborative academic tasks.  One prioritized instructional focus is to use an instructional strategy such as "learning partners" to promote student engagement in high levels of discourse and collaboration across grades and subjects. Frame each lesson with an "aim" or objective that students should meet by the end of the class.   Teachers offer multiple entry points into the lesson by providing students with scaffolds such as graphic organizers, checklists, writing and discussion prompts, and translated student materials.  The engagement of students in purposeful inquiry within every lesson through project-based learning is an instructional priority school wide. Consequently, the instructional leadership team and teacher teams strategically embedded into the curricula collaborative projects that are presented to a panel of judges in school wide "panel" and "round table" competitions during the twice a year Round table Project Event.  High order skills and rigorous habits are promoted across grade levels and disciplines for all students through the implementation of school wide practices such as using the common Morris Academy Collaborative Studies (MACS) unit and lesson plan templates.  The goal for each academic department is to have students think accurately and clearly while identifying and considering multiple meanings, taking and supporting positions, and engaging in disciplined inquiry and thought.  Teachers plan for multiple entry points into a lesson for a variety of learners by adjusting the curricula and identifying possible scaffolds that could be used for the lesson, such as graphic organizers, visual aids and cues, and reading passages 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Lesson plans include language objectives to support ENL students and instructional strategies for students with disabilities.  Teachers include extension activities for higher-level students in their lesson plans, such as self-reflective writing tasks. Community School Forum - school wide event that invites parents to volunteer time and guarantee their partnership in school events and meetings. Reward Programs (Honors Night) - parents and students are honored and awarded certificates at this annual school wide celebration. School Wide Parent Survey - made available at monthly Parent Association meetings Parents are invited to Grade, Guidance Interventions throughout the school year on an as-needed basis September 2018-June 2019 Parent Outreach - When students are absent or late, parents are called. When students cut class, parents are notified through a phone call. Regular mail outs to promote parent and student support for activities throughout the school year September 2018 - June 2019. Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Community School Director Community Associates Attendance Team Members Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Parent Outreach /Logs - Teachers and Attendance Team participate in contacting parents throughout the school year September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Advisory Council (P.A.C.) This group meets weekly to analyze and advise on city and state mandates, and enacting the school mission and vision. Also partners with CUNY-N.Y.S.I.E.B monthly to strategize school policy and implementation strategies to support our Emerging Bilingual (ELL) population and with the Center for Supportive Schools to realize the possibilities of our recently acquired Community Schools Grant. School Wide Parent Survey - available to parents at monthly Parent Association meetings and throughout the school year Parents Parents are invited to Grade, Guidance Interventions Parent Outreach - When students are absent or late, parents are called. When students cut class, parents are notified through a phone call. There are regular mail outs (per marking period) to promote parent and student support for activities. This is done throughout the school year, September 2018 - June 2019. September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Parent Outreach/Logs: When students are absent or late, parents are called. When students cut class, parents are notified through a phone call. There are regular mail outs (per marking period) to promote parent and student support for activities. This is done throughout the school year September 2018 - June 2019. Principal Advisory Council (P.A.C) This group meets weekly to analyze and advise on city and state mandates, and enacting the school mission and vision. Also partners with CUNY-N.Y.S.I.E.B monthly to strategize school policy and implementation strategies to support our Emerging Bilingual (ELL) population and with the Center for Supportive Schools to realize the possibilities of our recently acquired Community Schools Grant. Parents Students September 2018 - Teachers June 2019 Administrators Counselors PD Consultant Support Staff Team Leaders Department Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. MACS has leveraged our professional learning time for dedicated parent outreach. With the leadership of our Attendance Team and Community School Director, our teachers and staff members are increasing our outreach and services for parents and families. Through letters, phone calls, Pupil Path, email and and Kinvolved software, Academic Parent Teacher Team (A.P.T.T) meetings: We participate in the N.Y.C D.O.E initiative academic parent-teacher team that enhance parent teacher outcomes to interactive and educational for parents as they learn to support our students. Teachers host workshops that follow specific data points to help parents learn strategies and skills to be a partner in supporting their students to increase students outcomes within those data points leading to college and career success, Parent conferences teachers and families are in contact more now than ever before. Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies has a fully formed School Leadership Team as well as a Parent Association who provides insight and guidance on school initiatives and decision making. We’ve set up Parent Surveys and focus groups for parents and families to voice their thoughts and ideas. Results are shared publicly, and they inform adjustments to our systems and structures. The time line for each of these activities is September 2018 - June 2019. S.L.T meetings are held monthly, September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Association meetings are held monthly, September 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Two Attendance Team meetings (Long Term Absentee Attendance meetings and Attendance Incentive Attendance meetings) are held weekly, September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance meeting are held weekly, September 2018 - June 2019 Professional Developments are held weekly, September 2018 - June 2019 Mail-outs of progress reports are sent out per semester, September 2018 - June 2019 Team Leader meetings are held weekly, September 2018 - June 2019 K-involved messages are sent out daily, September 2018 - June 2019 Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Online credit accumulation (Learning Apex), Regents Prep, After School Tutoring ( approximately 40 hours ), hired a College Adviser, exam prep materials, Teacher Supervising per session (approximately 100 hours ), Pathways to Leadership partnership and clubs, hiring of a Community Schools Director, Hiring of a Social Worker, Read 180 elective, content literacy elective, Saturday School ( approximately 200 hours ), double periods of Math and schedule adjustment for teacher per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will like to see 20 percent of the class of 2019 on track for graduation. We will do this by furthering cohort 2019 analysis using our student sorter data in our Google domain to find success and areas of concern in our students’ path to graduation and devise action plans for each student individually to support their progress toward graduations and their success. We will also use this analysis over a two week period to inform our support our seniors (S.O.S) initiative where teachers are paired with groups of seniors as mentors supporting students with understanding their transcript data and remaining requirements to graduate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure for this goal is reports and data from ATS, STARS, Skedula, and student transcripts. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? SUMMARY OF STRENGTHS: In our Quality Review Results , 1.1 - Ensure engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards , was an area of celebration and we received a Well Developed. Instruction & Engagement Observation Focus (2012-2013): Prior to the adoption of the Danielson Framework by the N.Y.C DOE, MACS was using key components to develop increased awareness to communicate explicit expectations for instruction and student engagement. Every teacher received six observations with feedback focused on instructional practices that increased student engagement. Danielson Domains and Professional Learning (2013-14): After the adoption of the Danielson Framework by the N.Y.C DOE, MACS built on the solid foundation by creating awareness for teachers about Danielson Domains, professional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  learning and expected teacher practice. Through a series of Professional Development (PD) sessions on the Danielson Domains including individual inventories, team collaboration, and whole school professional development activities, school leaders focused on instructional practices that developed students' skills related to Writing With Evidence from sources as a leverage area for increased student achievement and increased student-centered instruction. Refining Student-Centered Learning Emphasizing Student Collaboration (2015-16): This year, MACS is building on the previous three years by deepening teachers’ practice around designing student-centered Instruction through professional learning that helps teachers implement key instructional strategies fidelity. Through a series of iterative workshops, teachers learn, design, apply, reflect and share school wide strategies beginning with this semester’s Carousel Strategy that puts students first. Teachers are provided support though department meetings and coaching from Model and Lead Teachers. IMPACT: Each year, our Observation Tracker/Advance Tracker has noted improvements in teachers’ performance aligned with the Danielson Framework. Each professional learning cycle, teachers bring their own work products and student samples for analysis in PD sessions. School leaders observe teachers’ in practice as they implement the school instructional initiatives and provide actionable feedback about how strategies can be revised or refined for increased effectiveness. Multiple Entry Points Designing Coherent Instruction: Teachers utilize the MACS Lesson Planning Template and the MACS Unit Plan Template to design engaging, and rigorous lesson plans aligned with Common Core Learning Standards and the Danielson Framework. Instruction Team: A teacher team with members in each content area chooses and develops instructional strategies through trial, reflection, and inter-visitation to share with the staff in PD sessions and increase learning opportunities for all. IMPACT: Building on past differentiation professional development cycles, these structures continue the conversation in our professional community of meeting students’ needs. Teachers have an increased number of supports in providing differentiated instruction and the effect can be seen in teachers’ planning and execution of lessons. Promote Thinking and Participation MACS Instructional Strategies: With a focus on instructional strategies that maximize critical thinking, collaboration, participation, and Working with Evidence from sources, teachers across content areas promote thinking and participation. Across the school, teachers utilize the For/Against Organizer, Accountable Talk and writing, and the Carousel to deepen understanding. Projects-Based Learning System: Teachers participate in a Projects Share with content area colleagues to develop best practices in implementing the project. Projects engage students in higher order thinking skills to demonstrate their learning. Students participate in the system detailed previously, and the Projects-/Based Learning system offers several opportunities for students to develop reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills throughout the year. IMPACT: Teachers are more self-reflective about their practice, and students are challenged more regularly to become active, independent learners developing collaborative skills. Assessment Alignment Projects-Based Learning: As a projects-based school, our curriculum is aligned with rigorous projects across content areas. As teachers design projects for panels and Round-table presentations, their instructional units are deeply 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  connected to the C.C.L.S aligned project. Teachers projects are developed individually, and receive actionable feedback from the administration, department teams, and teachers from the ELL and Special Education teams. Teacher and student performance are evaluated as projects are presented to the school community. Periodic Assessment (D.Y.O/MOSL): For five years, MACS has utilized a system of periodic assessments to monitor student progress on specific standards or content area skills across content areas. Teachers administer, score, analyze data, and use the data to inform their practice in 3-4 D.Y.O Cycles per year. They share their learning in Department teams. Last year, Departments were encouraged to align their D.Y.O assessments with their MOSL assessment to increase the benefits of the information without increasing the number of assessments students were required to take. IMPACT: Over the past three years, we have seen significant gains in student participation in Panels and Round-table events. Even though we host Round-tables on a student non-attendance day, we had over 200 students at our last event. Additionally, because of our commitment to periodic assessment aligned with MOSL, we were able to see gains in student achievement through MOSL assessments as evident by MOSL teacher ratings. Data Informed Instruction By working in cycles of assessment, teachers use a wide variety of data to inform their instruction following an inquiry process that includes the following stages: Aspire, Acquire/Apply, Administer, Analyze, and Adjust. Individually and in teams, teachers analyze data from D.Y.O assessments, Regents, and school-wide instructional strategies in PD sessions. Last year, teachers developed professional portfolios to collect all of their assessment and analysis work. This year, as we’ve moved our professional products onto an internal school website (the staff domain), teachers are able to archive digitally as well as physically. IMPACT: Data-informed adjustments to instruction have met student needs as evidenced by increased scores in D.Y.O rubric categories across subgroups. Checks for Understanding & Self-Assessment IMPACT: Increasing the consistency and frequency with which we use formative assessments has infused our professional learning community with a spirit of self-reflection and adjustment according to student needs. In our efforts to put students first, these assessments have helped us to plan with a focus and a flexibility that is improving instruction at MACS. PRIORITY NEEDS : Though we received a Proficient on our 2017-2018 School Quality Review (1.2) developing teacher pedagogy, this was was identified as our area of focus. - Continue to develop our Lunch Club and Extended Day programs so that students have multiple opportunities for extra help - Utilize peer mentoring program and student leaders to act as peer tutors. - Continue professional development focused on student-centered learning and deepening students’ understanding of the material. - Rigorous Instruction - Struggling credit accumulation rates in the 10th and 11th grade and struggling performance on state exams especially Common Core Math and Global Regents exams require that we review instructional strategies and implement and refine them in PD cycles and Collaborative Team meetings. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will increase our attendance rate by 2%. As measured by data from ATS, STARS, and Progress Reports. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff)  Daily Parent Outreach (Letters, Phone calls)  School Messenger - Automated phone calling system - used daily  Round-tables - Projects-Based learning system where students defend their work like a Master’s Thesis that culminate in a celebration of student work for those students who qualify. These systems will be used school-wide. Each of these action items are done through the school year: Attendance Teacher and Attendance Team Community School Director  Team Interventions  Certificates and postings in high traffic hallway areas of Top September 2018 Attendance Awards Increased offerings for Clubs and Extracurricular activities   ATS cut reports   Parent Outreach by Teachers - Through Progress Reports Skedula Anecdotals, Lateness each marking period parents are contacted using K-involved technology system.  Guidance Interventions  Attendance Team Weekly Meetings and Follow-up  Coordinating with School Safety and the Building Council  Leverage of Community School budget to provide attendance incentives - budget analysis and mediation  Attendance Teacher - Home visits  Additional Social work and interns to address external issues affecting attendance  Peer Mentoring Program Strategies to support, address the needs of students who are ELLs, who have disabilities and sub groups:  Increased offering of extra academic help (Extended Day and Saturday School ) Student Intervention Logs around attendance   Peer Group Connection – Peer leaders support students both academically with tutoring and social-emotionally with advisory like sessions. Flexible Individualized Scheduling  – June 2019 Projects Coordinator Teaching staff Grade Teams Counselors Deans Administrators Social work team Peer Mentors These systems will be used school-wide Each of these action items are done through the school year: September 2018 - June 2019 Teacher ClubSponsors Extended Day Senior Peers Counselors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30 Teaching Staff Programmers Counselors Teams Team Leaders  Grade Team Initiatives – Teams use student data to support interventions ad inform grade-wide strategies and norms.  Department Initiatives – collaborative planning for projects utilizing our Special Education (SpEd) and English as a Second Language (ESL) to build scaffolds to the central Projects-Based Learning. Professional Development and Structures to impact Change:  Carousel Strategy cycles - using a Common Core aligned peer evaluation based strategy in 5 week cycles to study the qualitative data of student outcomes after using said strategy then refining practice and implementing again to monitor strategy effectiveness , gains in teacher performance and quality of student outcomes  Department Meetings – through observations, learning  walks, D.Y.O (Design Your Own) data cycles of weekly department team meetings we will monitor above mentioned strategies. Feedback from Specialists: ELL and Special Education teachers make recommendations on necessary accommodations for teachers’ unit plans, project design, lesson plans, D.Y.O Periodic Assessments, and Mid-Terms/Finals. Collaborative Team Teaching (C.T.T) & Integrated Co-Teaching (I.C.T) partnerships increase student engagement and multiple entry points for students at all different learning levels.  The School Implementation Team considers instruction and sets goals for working with Students with Disabilities, and CUNY-N.Y.S.I.E.B supports the ESL department and staff in meeting the needs of ELLs. A variety of coaches from the DOE and network supports also support our teacher development. Each of these action items are done through the school year: Sept. 2017 - June 2018 School Messenger Parents Daily Attendance Teacher Parent Association Meetings held monthly Progress Report per Marking Period September 2018- June 2019 Attendance Team Community Associates Community School Director Parent Outreach by Teachers Principal Advisory Council (P.A.C) Parents Students Teams meet Weekly Teachers Administrators 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31 Sept.ember 2018 - June 2019 PD Consultant Support Staff Team Leaders Department Leaders This group meets weekly to analyze and advise on city and state mandates, and enacting the school mission and vision. Also partners with CUNY-N.Y.S.I.E.B monthly to strategize school policy and implementation strategies to support our Emerging Bilingual (ELL) population and with the Center for Supportive Schools to realize the possibilities of our Community Schools Grant. Freshmen Focus Team This team meets weekly to plan and problem-solve all items referencing our 9th grade students Graduation Team This team meets weekly to give students feedback on their paths to graduation, take students on college trips, provide access college readiness courses like At Home in College C.U.N.Y English, C.U.N.Y Math, College Now, Advance Placement US History Programs, and bring speakers and workshops to our student population and parents School Culture & Learning Environment Team Curriculum Development Team Instruction Team School Data Team All Department Teams Parents Students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. MACS has leveraged our professional learning time for dedicated parent outreach. With the leadership of our Attendance Team and Community School Director, our teachers and staff members are increasing our outreach and services for parents and families. Through letters, phone calls, Pupil Path, email and Kinvolved software, Academic Parent Teacher Team (A.P.T.T) meetings: We participate in the N.Y.C D.O.E initiative academic parent-teacher team that enhance parent teacher outcomes to interactive and educational for parents as they learn to support our students. Teachers host workshops that follow specific data points to help parents learn strategies and skills to be a partner in supporting their students to increase students outcomes within those data points leading to college and career success, Parent conferences teachers and families are in contact more now than ever before. Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies has a fully formed School Leadership Team as well as a Parent Association who provides insight and guidance on school initiatives and decision making. We’ve set up Parent Surveys and focus groups for parents and families to voice their thoughts and ideas. Results are shared publicly, and they inform adjustments to our systems and structures. The time line for each of these activities is September 2018 - June 2019. Key Personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are: Teachers, Community School Director, Attendance Team and our Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community School budget , Community School Director, Community Associate, Attendance incentives Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the end of the first semester in February 2019 we would like to see a 0.5 percent increase in attendance as measured by the ATS RYMA report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure for this goal is the ATS RYMA report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed x x x x using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. SUMMARY OF STRENGTHS: In 4.2 of our 2017-2018 Quality Review - Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning we received a Well Developed and we also received a Well Developed in 1.1 – ensure engaging, rigorous and coherent curricula in all subjects, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to Common Core Learning Standards and/or content standards. Professional Development Cycles: Teachers follow a five-week cycle in professional development sessions where they learn and implement student-centered, Common Core-aligned collaborative strategies and return to PD sessions with student outcomes (student work) to analyze the work and refine the implementation of the strategy for improved student outcomes in all subjects. Refining Student-Centered Learning Emphasizing Student Collaboration : This year, MACS is building on the previous two years by deepening teachers’ practice around designing Student-Centered Instruction through professional learning that helps teachers implement key instructional strategies with fidelity, and flexibility. Through a series of iterative workshops, teachers Learn, Design, Apply, Reflect and Share school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  wide strategies beginning with this semester’s Carousel Strategy that puts students first. Teachers are provided support though department meetings and coaching from Model and Lead Teachers. Common Core Professional Learning : we MACS engaged in a professional learning deep dive into the Common Core Learning Standards. Through careful interpretation, analysis, and adoption of a selection of priority standards, the MACS Community developed ownership of the standards by authoring our adopted MACS Common Core Standards for Success. Teachers worked with department teams to align selected unit plans with the Common Core. Project Alignment : we leveraged our focus on Projects-Based Learning to align our projects with the Common Core, creating a curricular ripple effect as assessments drive instruction. Utilizing principles of backwards planning, teachers redesigned their curricula to meet project needs and align with the Common Core. Curriculum Supports and the Curriculum Team : we continue our path to Common Core alignments with internal and external curriculum supports. Internally, the ELA curriculum was re-designed for Common Core alignment and spirals with the Common Core standards. Then core reading and writing standards were attached and aligned to content area curricula in Social Studies and Science. Externally, we have turned to New Visions a2i to support our Math curriculum and their Global curriculum pilot for Global History. Other external supports for our curriculum development are Debating US History, At Home in C.U.N.Y, C.U.N.Y-N.Y.S.I.E.B (supporting ELLs), and the D.O.E’s Teacher Development coach supporting Literacy in Science. Also, we have established the Curriculum Team who, similar to the D.O.E’s Common Core Fellows, investigates current curricula and is working toward developing model CCLS aligned units and offering advisement on alignment. PRIORITY NEEDS : According to our 2017-2018 Quality Review we received a Proficient in 1.2 – developing teacher pedagogue in the area of focus. - We will continue to develop systems wherein teachers explicitly share and explain the significance of the school-wide Writing with Evidence Rubric, as well as the student’s individual results - We will continue to share progress with students in the form of school-wide progress reports each marking period - We will have teacher teams continue to develop common language and best practices around teaching students to write with evidence - Across Regents and Common Core exams students struggle with using evidence to answer questions, address tasks and come to accurate conclusions. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 student performance will increase by 20% in the Command of Evidence category of the school-wide Regents School Targeted Assessment Rubric (Regents STAR) designed by teachers collaboratively in department 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36 meetings and utilized in our DYO periodic assessment cycles which inform instructional adjustments and feature student reflection and goal setting. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Each year our Observation Tracker/Advance Tracker has noted improvements in teachers’ performance aligned with the Danielson Framework. Each professional learning cycle, teachers bring their own Writing with Evidence work products and student samples for analysis in PD sessions. School leaders observe teachers in practice as they implement the school instructional initiatives and provide actionable feedback about how strategies can be revised or refined for increased effectiveness. 9-12 Collaborative Teachers: utilize the MACS Lesson Planning Template and the MACS Unit Plan Template to design engaging, and rigorous lesson plans aligned with Common Core Learning Standards and the Danielson Framework. Planning and implementation of lessons brought into the PD cycle to analyze student work and consider multiple points of entry. ELL and Special Education teachers make recommendations on necessary accommodations for teachers’ unit plans, project design, lesson plans, D.Y.O Periodic Assessments, and Mid-Terms/Finals. C.T.T & I.C.T partnerships increase student engagement and multiple entry points for students at all different learning levels. ELLs Students with IEPs Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrators Teachers ELL Department Leader Each of these action items are done through the school year: September 2018 - June 2019 Each of these action items are done through the school year: September 2018 - Special Education Department Leader  The School Implementation Team considers instruction and June 2019 sets goals for working with students with disabilities, and C.U.N.Y-N.Y.S.I.E.B supports the ESL department and staff in meeting the needs of ELLs. A variety of coaches from the DOE and network supports also support our teacher development. Systems will be monitored through cycles of observations. School wide Parent Survey - Surveys are made available at monthly Parent Association meetings throughout the year September 2018-June 2019 Parents Each of these action items are done through the school year Administrators Counselors Team Leaders 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Parent Outreach - Outreach is done daily September 2018 - June 2019 Parents are invited to Grade, Guidance Interventions - Meetings are held on as as-needed basis September 2018 - through June 2019 When Students are absent or late, parents are called throughout the year September 2018-June 2019 When students cut class, parents are notified through a phone call home and a letter in the mail throughout the year September 2018-June 2019 Attendance Team Deans on an as-needed basis: September 2018 - June 2019 Parents Daily Administrators Parent Outreach/Call Logs by Teachers: Students Outreach is made daily via K-involved and phone calls Principal Advisory Council (P.A.C): This group meets weekly to analyze and advise on city and state mandates, and enacting the school mission and vision. Also partners with CUNY-N.Y.S.I.E.B monthly to strategize school policy and implementation strategies to support our Emerging Bilingual (ELL) population and with the Center for Supportive Schools to realize the possibilities of our recently acquired Community Schools Grant. Graduation Team: This team meets weekly to give students feedback on their paths to graduation, take students on college trips, provide access college readiness courses like At Home in College C.U.N.Y English, C.U.N.Y Math, College Now, Advance Placement US History Programs, and bring speakers and workshops to our student population and parents All Department Teams : Team meetings are weekly through the school year Support Staff PD Consultant Teachers September 2018 - Counselors June 2019 Team Leaders Department Leaders Department teams will meet weekly to create and analyze student outcomes informed by D.Y.O data to the command of evidence 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  category on the school-wide Writing with Evidence rubric. The D.Y.O will occur in 4 cycles through the year. Student outcomes from the D.Y.O will be incorporated into the data analysis structured by department to inform shifts in instructional strategies. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. MACS has leveraged our professional learning time for dedicated parent outreach. With the leadership of our Attendance Team and Community School Director, our teachers and staff members are increasing our outreach and services for parents and families. Through letters, phone calls, Pupil Path, email and Kinvolved software, Academic Parent Teacher Team (A.P.T.T) meetings: We participate in the N.Y.C D.O.E initiative academic parent-teacher team that enhance parent teacher outcomes to interactive and educational for parents as they learn to support our students. Teachers host workshops that follow specific data points to help parents learn strategies and skills to be a partner in supporting their students to increase students outcomes within those data points leading to college and career success, Parent conferences teachers and families are in contact more now than ever before. Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies has a fully formed School Leadership Team as well as a Parent Association who provides insight and guidance on school initiatives and decision making. We’ve set up Parent Surveys and focus groups for parents and families to voice their thoughts and ideas. Results are shared publicly, and they inform adjustments to our systems and structures. The time line for each of these activities is September 2018- June 2019. Key Personnel responsible for implementation and oversight are: Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Attendance Team and our Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators, Support Staff, Teachers, Counselors, Team Leaders, Department Leaders, Parent coordinator, Professional Developments, After school Tutoring, Extended Day, CPET partnership and literacy services, teacher per session for Extended Day and Saturday School, instructional support, content literacy class instructional program. Additional funding will always help to support our teachers’ professional individual support outside of the normal school day. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Building on February differentiation Professional Development cycles, these structures continue the conversation in our professional community of meeting students’ needs. Teachers have an increase number of supports in providing instruction and the effect can be seen in teachers’ planning and execution of lessons. Every 2 marking periods the students will fill out a self reflection form where they check their progress on the rubric with their class work and identify what steps they need to improve and set goals for themselves for progress on the rubric. This Writing with Evidence initiative is connected to our D.Y.O cycles. With each D.Y.O cycle (3-4) during the year individualized benchmarks and action plans will be set. In February 2019 we will review student improvement over a 2 week period and look for at least a 10% increase in student performance in their Command of Evidence. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure for this goal is the New York City Performance Task as the starting point teachers and students set goals for the command of evidence category of the school wide rubric that will be monitored as part of their D.Y.O cycle periodic assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. SUMMARY OF STRENGTHS: According to our 2017-2018 Quality Review our rating in each category increased : 1.1– Well Developed, 1.2 – Proficient, 2.2 – Well Developed, 3.4 – Proficient, 4.2 – Well Developed Practical Principles to Realize our Vision: To help teachers set high expectations for students, school leaders must set high expectations for teachers and staff. This is why the Administration has collaborated with the staff to create a system to develop high expectations for professionalism in our learning community outlined in the document Practical Principles to Realize our Vision. With the newsletter MACS Today, the Coverage Tracker, the 10 Traits of an Ideal Classroom Environment and an Ideal Lesson, and these professional agreements (the principles)— as a community we take our responsibilities to one another seriously. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  At MACS, we use teacher teams as a lever for transformational change across our school. Through extensive opportunities for teachers to become leaders, our school has developed highly effective systems and structures for teachers to work toward our vision together. Department Teams Activities: Department teams (Math, Science, Social Studies, English, English as a Second Language and Special Education) meet once a week during professional learning periods. Facilitated by Department Leaders, departments develop curriculum, provide feedback on projects and units, and plan vertically (9-12) aligning curriculum to the Common Core. Department teams analyze content specific data from D.Y.O/MOSL and Regents exams and follow an analysis of student work and adjustment to instruction protocol on a routine basis. Department Leaders meet weekly in a meeting facilitated by the Assistant Principal and are supported by the administration, network coaches, and C.P.E.T, a professional development organization aligned with Teachers College at Columbia University. IMPACT: Departments make collaborative decisions about integrating CCLS into curriculum and instruction, support one another for lesson planning and incorporating instructional strategies that put students first, and collaborate on methods for using multiple entry points for students at all levels. Department work has also influenced programming shifts like providing double periods of Math and ELA. School Teams Activities: School Teams (Freshman Focus, Graduation Team, Instructional Strategies, Curriculum Team, Data Team, and the School Culture Team) are the engine of the school, leveraging thematic inquiry-based work to drive us toward our goals. Each team, facilitated by a Team Leader, meets weekly with a targeted focus specifically assigned to the team’s theme. Teams design specific initiatives informed by the inquiry process and share their findings and learning with the staff at large. The Curriculum Team and the Instruction Team primarily handle the shift to the Common Core, but all teams work toward instructional supports for students. All teams also use data whether qualitative or quantitative in the pursuit of their goals. For example, the School Culture Team uses survey data past and current to inform initiatives and the Graduation Team uses Cohort 2017 academic data to guide seniors. Team Leaders meet weekly in a meeting facilitated by the Team Leader Leader and are supported by the administration, network coaches, and C.P.E.T, a Professional Development organization aligned with Teachers College at Columbia University. IMPACT: School Teams work collaboratively to better understand and work to develop solutions to significant challenges our school experiences. While each team has a different focus, the teams are all developing inquiry-based initiatives that they will share with the community to enhance our understanding of what students need. Other Special Teams · Principal Advisory Council: Meets weekly to analyze and advise on city and state mandates, and enacting the school mission and vision. Also partners with CUNY-N.Y.S.I.E.B monthly to strategize school policy and implementation strategies to support our Emerging Bilingual (ELL) population and with the Center for Supportive Schools to realize the possibilities of our recently acquired Community Schools Grant. · Attendance Team: Meets regularly to discuss the monitoring of students’ daily attendance, period by period cutting, lateness, and Long Term Absentee (L.T.A) status. · School Implementation Team: Meets regularly to set goals and drive initiatives supporting our students with Disabilities. Supporting Distributive Leadership 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  · Peer Collaborator /Literacy Coach · Peer Collaborator/Model Teachers · Department Leaders · School Team Leaders · Support Organizations – New Visions, C.P.E.T, Office of Teacher Effectiveness, Master/Model Teacher Program, C.U.N.Y- N.Y.S.I.E.B · IMPACT: Each year, our Observation Tracker/Advance Tracker has noted improvements in teachers’ performance aligned with the Danielson Framework. Each professional learning cycle, teachers bring their own work products and student samples for analysis in PD sessions. School leaders observe teachers’ in practice as they implement the school instructional initiatives and provide actionable feedback about how strategies can be revised or refined for increased effectiveness. PRIORITY NEEDS: According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review 1.2 – (Develop teacher pedagogy) identified teacher pedagogy for our school as an area of focus, though we received a proficient rating. - Administration and staff leaders will collaborate to enhance observation structure and increase the frequency of inter-visitation for feedback regarding instruction. - Increased opportunities for teachers to share their SMART goals within teacher teams, departments, and school wide, especially as they relate to increased Regents pass rates. - Increased opportunities for teachers to utilize assessments for learning strategies. During instruction these strategies will inform shift mid-lesson to improve student learning. Data point: Domain 3 for consistently struggling teachers, for an evidence point the observation tracker. - Administration, specifically the Principal, designed team and department expectation pages on focusing on data points including Regents’ exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the overall average score on June Regents exams will increase by 3 points (to 66 percent) as measured by June Regents results and supported by data from Mock Regents exams, Periodic Assessments, data from Extended Day programs, Saturday School and student data from Regents support partnerships. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). PD plan implemented involving adjustment to research strategies through 5 week cycles of strategies implementation analysis and adjustments as informed by student work outcome also extended day program, Saturday School and Mentoring Program. Plan and inform teacher of assessments necessary to align with regents’ exam strategies and Professional Development will be led by Administration and teacher leaders.  We have partnered with CUNY N.Y.S.I.E.B and hired additional personnel to address our English Language Learners needs in language acquisition.  Our students with disabilities and their needs have required that we hire additional personnel and to leverage current partnerships for training and increased resources. We will continue to address their needs through flexible programming and individualized programming as well. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Seniors Struggling students First time Regents takers Regents re-takers ELL Students with I.E.Ps Each of these action items are done through the school year: Nov. 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Lead Teachers Graduation Team Art Teacher ELL Department Leader Special Education Department Leader Each of these action items are done through the school year: Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Parent Surveys - Are created by our Community Associates in partnership with our Community School Director and is made available to parents throughout the school year and at our monthly Parent Association meetings Parent Outreach Logs - Administration will monitor parent outreach logs of United Federation of Teachers (U.F.T.) professional time to ensure collaboration with parents. Community School Grant Program - Principal and Assistant Principals will work with Community School Director to increase Parents students Daily and Weekly Community School Director Coordinator from Center of Support Sept. 2018 - June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  opportunities for student engagement and parent involvement to increase student learning and performance on exams. Parent Outreach/Call Logs by Teachers - Are done daily via K-involved and phone calls. Parents students Principal Advisory Council (P.A.C) - Meets weekly to analyze and advise on city and state mandates, and enacting the school mission and vision. Also partners with CUNY-N.Y.S.I.E.B monthly to strategize school policy and implementation strategies to support our Emerging Bilingual (ELL) population and with the Center for Supportive Schools to realize the possibilities of our recently acquired Community Schools Grant. Teacher leaders will facilitate meetings for teams Graduation Team - This team meets weekly to give students feedback on their paths to graduation, take students on college trips, provide access college readiness courses like At Home in College C.U.N.Y English, C.U.N.Y Math, College Now, Advance Placement US History Programs, and bring speakers and workshops to our student population and parents Daily and Weekly Administrators Support Staff PD Consultant Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Teachers Counselors Team Leaders Department Leaders Regents Academy Saturday School Lunch and Extended Day Tutoring Purpose Tutors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  All Department Teams - Department leaders will inform principal of resources and imitative needed to support students and teacher to increase regents’ exam performance. All systems and structures contribute to the achievement of the increase of the score of student Regents Exams. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. MACS has leveraged our professional learning time for dedicated parent outreach. With the leadership of our Attendance Team and Community School Director, our teachers and staff members are increasing our outreach and services for parents and families. Through letters, phone calls, Pupil Path, email and K-involved software, Academic Parent Teacher Team (A.P.T.T) meetings: We participate in the N.Y.C D.O.E initiative academic parent-teacher team that enhance parent teacher outcomes to interactive and educational for parents as they learn to support our students. Teachers host workshops that follow specific data points to help parents learn strategies and skills to be a partner in supporting their students to increase students outcomes within those data points leading to college and career success, Parent conferences teachers and families are in contact more now than ever before. Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies has a fully formed School Leadership Team as well as a Parent Association who provides insight and guidance on school initiatives and decision making. We’ve set up Parent Surveys and focus groups for parents and families to voice their thoughts and ideas. Results are shared publicly, and they inform adjustments to our systems and structures. The time line for each of these activities is September 2018 - June 2019. Key Personnel responsible for implementation oversight and leadership roles are: Teachers, Community Associates, Community School Director, and Attendance Team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators, Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Teachers, school-wide teams, Professional Developments, After School Tutoring, Extended Day, and Credit Recovery/Saturday School, partnerships with content literacy, double period classes added for Math, Global and History, purchase of curriculum materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In January 2019 we will like to see improved test scores on Mock Regents Exams as compared to January 2019. After the January 2019 Regents we will calculate and analyze data around student performance. Administration and teacher leaders will review data and propose adjustments to academic support systems leading to mock exams and subsequent data analysis in March and April. Item analysis for January Regents and mock exams will inform strategies as well. Data analysis will occur in February 2019 for 2 weeks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure for this goal are Mock Regents and data around student performance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. SUMMARY OF STRENGTHS: Data Trends: According to the New York City School Quality report our College Readiness rate of 2017-2018 is 33 percent, above the comparison group borough average. The school leader along with the Principal Advisory Council (P.A.C) proposed and was awarded a grant to become one of the 45 community schools in the N.Y.C.D.O.E. The grant will allow for the school and its community to support the initiatives below and develop new initiatives that will increase our college index (combined college preparatory score and college readiness score) and increase the reciprocal communication with families and community stake holders. Partnering with Families Parent Outreach: In addition to the systems involving parents and in alignment with the N.Y.C D.O.E’s focus on increasing parent engagement, MACS has leveraged our professional learning time for dedicated parent outreach. With 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  the leadership of our Attendance Team and Community School Director, our teachers and staff members are increasing our outreach and services for parents and families. Through letters, phone calls, Pupil Path, email and and K-involved software, Academic Parent Teacher Team (A.P.T.T) meetings: We participate in the N.Y.C D.O.E initiative academic parent-teacher team that enhance parent teacher outcomes to interactive and educational for parents as they learn to support our students. Teachers host workshops that follow specific data points to help parents learn strategies and skills to be a partner in supporting their students to increase students outcomes within those data points leading to college and career success, Parent conferences teachers and families are in contact more now than ever before. Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies has a fully formed School Leadership Team as well as a Parent Association who provides insight and guidance on school initiatives and decision making. We’ve set up Parent Surveys and focus groups for parents and families to voice their thoughts and ideas. Results are shared publicly, and they inform adjustments to our systems and structures regarding socio-emotional and academic support and success leading to college readiness. Mentoring Programs: Through strategic partnerships, MACS hosts the Morris Academy Mentors in association with Hope for New York that pairs MACS Students with volunteer mentors (N.Y.C professionals) who meet their students on Saturdays on a monthly basis, attend field trips and workshops, and provide personal support as well as insight and exposure into a variety of professional fields. Achievement Mentoring and Support our Seniors (S.O.S) mentoring also pairs teachers with students to get and achieve goals on their path to graduation and success in college and careers. IMPACT: Collaborations between parents, staff and partners has increased dramatically. From these partnerships we have made decisions to increase our Extended Day and Saturday School offerings. Family expectations grew as they learned about and were included in our high expectations systems. Strategic Partnerships AP for All : Will bring new AP courses to our school. Our school will receive 'rigorous training for new and continuing AP teachers and assist school leaders in identifying students who are ready for AP course work and prepare those students to address equity gaps.' College Now: "Helps our students meet high school graduation requirements and prepare for success in college, both academically and socially. In addition, program administrators have designed program activities with the goal of enhancing performance on Regents and CUNY placement exams sot that students will be able to enroll in college with the need for remediation." Columbia University, the Yankees, and Robotics: We have an 8 year tradition in our partnership with Columbia University where students build a robot assigned a specific task to compete with teams from around the world. The work happens at Columbia where our students work in partnership with Columbia students. We have a successful record in robotics in a highly competitive environment and are consistently honored on the field by the New York Yankees for our accomplishments. J.R.O.T.C Program: Led by experienced military personnel, our J.R.O.TC program continues to thrive as a student leadership program where students, through character development and mental and physical training, seek to serve our 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  community well. The current J.R.O.T,C team has been awarded several trophies this year in drill and inspection competition. Teachers College – Center for the Professional Education of Teachers(C,P.E.T): Continuing a 5 year partnership with TC Consultant from TC C.P.E.T, Roberta Kang supports the development of our teacher leaders and administrators. C.U.N.Y-N.Y.S.I.E.B: To support the needs of our emerging bilingual population, we were selected as a partner in the C.U.N.Y-N.Y.S.I.E.B state funded program that provides a 3 year customized plan to develop systems and support structures for engaging students who are learning English. Arts Connection: Through a Violence Prevention Grant we continue our partnership with Arts Connection to bring visual arts to our students and to incorporate this artwork into our projects-based learning systems. Theater for a New Audience (T.F.N.A): Continuing a 5 year partnership with T.F.N.A, we have paired Common Core aligned curriculum with rich, theater-going experiences and play writing projects where student plays are performed by professional actors. Last year they named us School of the Year for our collaborative efforts to bring the arts to our students. The arts prepare students for college and careers by building collaborative and presentational skills. Specific Initiatives: Other initiatives with larger systems also convey high expectations to our students. The 9th grade Lunch and Learn supports 9th graders both social-emotionally and academically. Students eat lunch in groups and have structured online opportunities to increase their credit accumulation and to bond with teachers and students in their grades in advisory-like clubs. Our Support Our Seniors program matches seniors with teachers so teachers can monitor their students’ progress toward meeting the expectations of graduation and college and career readiness. Skedula Progress Reports and Pupil Path convey high expectations to parents and students, and monthly attendance initiatives designed and facilitated by our attendance team also convey high expectations for targeted students around attendance goals. IMPACT: Each of these systems has increased awareness of and proficiency in meeting high expectations. Our projects and student work have become more rigorous, and the teaching staff collaborates more often to meet these high expectations. It is evidenced in the quality and turn-in rate of Professional Development deliveries. Students feel the need to work hard to get good grades as evidenced in our School Culture Survey, and Parents have shown approval in various forms of feedback regarding the expectations placed on their students. Department Teams Activities: Department teams (Math, Science, Social Studies, English, English as a Second Language and Special Education) meet once a week during professional learning periods. Facilitated by Department Leaders, departments develop curriculum, provide feedback on projects and units, and plan vertically (9-12) aligning curriculum to the Common Core. Department teams analyze content specific data from D.Y.O/MOSL and Regents exams and follow an analysis of student work and adjustment to instruction protocol on a routine basis. Department Leaders meet weekly in a meeting facilitated by the Assistant Principal and are supported by the administration, network coaches, and C.P.E.T, a professional development organization aligned with Teachers College at Columbia University. IMPACT: Departments make collaborative decisions about integrating CCLS into curriculum and instruction, support one another for lesson planning and incorporating instructional strategies that put students first, and collaborate on 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  methods for using multiple entry points for students at all levels. Department work has also influenced programming shifts like providing double periods of Math and ELA. School Teams Activities: School Teams (Freshman Focus, Graduation Team, Instructional Strategies, Curriculum Team, Data Team, Collaborative Learning Team , Academic Equity and Access team) are the engine of the school, leveraging thematic inquiry-based work to drive us toward our goals. Each team, facilitated by a Team Leader, meets weekly with a targeted focus specifically assigned to the team’s theme. Teams design specific initiatives informed by the inquiry process and share their findings and learning with the staff at large. The Curriculum Team and the Instruction Team primarily handle the shift to the Common Core, but all teams work toward instructional supports for students. All teams also use data whether qualitative or quantitative in the pursuit of their goals. For example, the School Culture Team uses survey data past and current to inform initiatives and the Graduation Team uses Cohort 2016 academic data to guide seniors. Team Leaders meet weekly in a meeting facilitated by the Team Leader Leader and are supported by the administration, network coaches, and C.P.E.T, a Professional Development organization aligned with Teachers College at Columbia University. Attendance Team: Meets regularly to discuss the monitoring of students’ daily attendance, period by period cutting, lateness, and Long Term Absentee (L.T.A) status. IMPACT: School Teams work collaboratively to better understand and work to develop solutions to significant challenges our school experiences. While each team has a different focus, the teams are all developing inquiry-based initiatives that they will share with the community to enhance our understanding of what students need. PRIORITY NEEDS : In the category of College and Career Readiness on the New York City School Quality Report of 2017-2018 16% of our students successfully completed approved college or career preparatory courses and exams, 33% of our students are college ready upon graduation. Though this is above the borough average we will focus on collaborating with parents and teachers to increase our college index (combined college preparatory score and college readiness score.) In the category of strong family and community ties on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide our school received a 91% positive response which is average for the city-wide response for high schools according to the survey. Though we received a Proficient on our 2017-2018 Quality Review in 3.4 (establishing school culture for learning) we will focus on collaborating with parents and teachers to meet the goal. - We will continue to provide opportunities for parents and community stakeholders to contribute to school-specific decisions and participate in college and career related initiatives. - We will provide Additional/enhanced training for parents and families around using the school-based communication system, Pupil path. Continue to survey parents and students regularly. - Expansion of School Leadership Team to include more parent and student members. According to the 2017-2018 Quality Review 1.2 – (Develop teacher pedagogy) identified teacher pedagogy for our school as an area of focus, though we received a proficient rating. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  - Administration and staff leaders will collaborate to enhance observation structure and increase the frequency of inter-visitation for feedback regarding instruction. - Increased opportunities for teachers to share their SMART goals within teacher teams, departments, and school wide, especially as they relate to increased Regents pass rates. - Increased opportunities for teachers to utilize assessments for learning strategies. During instruction these strategies will inform shift mid-lesson to improve student learning. Data point: Domain 3 for consistently struggling teachers, for an evidence point the observation tracker. - Administration, specifically the Principal, designed team and department expectation pages on focusing on data points including Regents’ exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. .By August 2019 we will increase the College Course Prep Index and the College Readiness Index by 25%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School-wide utilization of the collaboratively designed MACS Lesson Plan Template which includes considerations for differentiation, college ready skills, rigor in writing, and data informed planning. Seniors First time Regents takers The work of the Collaborative Learning Team (culturally responsive instruction) and the Academic Equity and Access team. Regents re-takers Socio-emotional supports such as one-to-one counseling, peer mentoring, and mentoring by staff and partnerships. Support from the full-time College Confident college advisor including workshops and trips for all grades. College Access for All support AP for All supports College Now program with HOSTOS Lunch and Extended Day Tutoring Purpose Tutors ELLs SWDs SIFE STH Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Each of these action items are done through the school year: September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Lead Teachers Teachers Graduation Team Collaborative Learning Team Academic Equity and Access Team College Adviser Counselors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Regents Academy SUNY & CUNY Lockdown: On a selected day all seniors receive assistance with applying to CUNY and SUNY schools. Up until this day the seniors research where they would like to apply, what they are looking for and which schools are a good fit. On this day the seniors submit applications to these schools with the assistance of counselors and MACS staff. Students and families in attendance also participate in a raffle. Team Interventions – increased opportunities for student participation through our partnership with C.P.E.T we will increase the opportunities for student led and grade participation focusing on ELLS and students with disabilities. Students ELLs SWDs STH SIFE Each of these action items are done through the school year daily and weekly: Teachers Team Leaders Counselors Sept. 2018 - June 2019 P.G.C (Peer Group Connection) - peer leaders support all students in 9th grade ELLs and students with IEPS assigned to peers who have demonstrated leadership skills that will accommodate their needs. Annual MACS Honor Night Parents/ June 2019 Team Leaders Parents and students are celebrated and receive certificates from school staff during this annual school community function students Award Ceremonies Parent Association Meetings and School Leadership Team meetings are held monthly throughout the school year September 2018 - September 2019 Parents Students Counselors Administrators Each of these action items are done Administrators Support Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Community School events and Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Outreach/Call Logs - calls and mailings are done daily and monthly respectively by Teachers and our Attendance Team throughout the school year September 2018 - June 2019 through the school year: PD Consultant Teachers Counselors September 2018- Team Leaders June 2019 Department Leaders Graduation Team This team meets weekly to give students feedback on their paths to graduation, take students on college trips, provide access college readiness courses like At Home in College C.U.N.Y English, C.U.N.Y Math, College Now, Advance Placement US History Programs, and bring speakers and workshops to our student population and parents 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. ArtsConnection and Community Supportive Schools. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per Session opportunities for a Coordinator of Student Affairs, Community Schools Director, Community Assistant, College Adviser. Partnership with AP for All, College Now and New York University. Increased partnerships that support student and parent leadership, materials and supplies for Parent Association meetings, increased opportunities for Student Aides and peer tutoring. K-involved technology is used to foster communication with parents and students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of the first semester in February we will calculate and analyze data around student performance. Administration and teacher leaders will review data and propose adjustments to academic support systems leading to mock exams and subsequent data analysis in March and April. Item analysis for January Regents and mock exams will inform strategies as well. Data analysis will occur in February 2019 for 2 weeks. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure for this goal are data from student work outcome, Extended Day program, Saturday School and our school’s Mentoring program, AP for All classes, College Now, ATS, skedula, STARS, Progress Reports and student logs, SUNY- CUNY lock-down. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Performance on the Writing with Evidence Rubric Design Your Own (D.Y.O) MOSL Class Pass Rate Transcript Data Mathematics D.Y.O MOSL Class Pass Rate Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Electives that include Regents prep Small group During the school day and After school Program: One-to-one Tutoring Credit Recovery / Saturday School allow students to make up missed work or to prep for Regents examinations Project-Based work / School wide Round-tables Electives that include Regents prep Program: Credit Recovery / Saturday School allow students to make up missed work or to prep for Regents examinations Classroom Saturday school Small group One-to-one Tutoring During the school day and After school Classroom Saturday school Transcript Data Project based work / School wide Round-tables 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Science D.Y.O MOSL Class Pass Rate Transcript Data Social Studies D.Y.O MOSOL Class Pass Rate Credit Recovery / Saturday School allow students to make up missed work or to prep for Regents examinations Project based work / School wide Round-tables Electives that include Regents prep Program: Credit Recovery / Saturday School allow students to make up missed work or to prep for Regents examinations Transcript Data Project based work / School wide Round-tables Small group During the school day and After school Electives that include Regents prep One-to-one Tutoring Program: Saturday school Classroom Small group One-to-one Tutoring During the school day and After school Classroom Saturday school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Student attendance data Student performance data Counseling Small group During the school day and After school Peer support One-to-one Tutoring Job opportunities Peer to peer Progress reports High – interest clubs Team Intervention Anecdotal on Skedula Behavioral data Family Consultation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently we have 34 Students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Each Student in Temporary Housing will receive a backpack with toiletries per semester. Additionally, Students in Temporary Housing and their parents will benefit from our school's Annual Coat and Clothes Drives. MACS Students in Temporary Housing can apply for a paid MACS Student Aide job; a program designed specifically for Morris Academy students which pairs students with staff members to work within our school. Counseling services will be provided for each student by grade counselors and our newly hired on-site social worker to ensure this population is on track for academic success. In addition, Administrators have provided Astor Family Services and an on-site Family Analyst who identifies the needs of each student. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. In addition to working with New Visions to support teachers in curriculum and leadership development through New Visions Workshops and coaching, partnering with Teachers College at Columbia University (CPET) to support new teachers and developing leaders in one-to-one coaching sessions, sending teachers to Literacy, Math, Special Education, and ESL Professional Development sessions sponsored by the DOE, and partnering with the Center for Supportive Schools for socio-emotional strategy development, we have also designed a CTLE-certified professional development plan (again with CPET at TC) that features 5-week inquiry cycles where all teachers and leaders participate in implementing schoolwide strategies across content areas and use student work and data to inform revisions to the strategy in multiple peer-review sessions before solidifying expectations around how these strategies will be used in our classrooms to support success for all students in achieving city and state standards. Internally the framework of our PD is created by the principal and our CPET consultant and then various stakeholders contribute to the refinement and execution of the plan as the year continues.  For recruitment and retention of teachers we feature professional learning in the areas of socio-emotional support and use our Community School budget to fund tutoring, extra-curricular, mentoring and leadership opportunities that are flexible and designed in response to teacher interests. Additionally, we participate in both the AP for All teacher leader program and the Teacher Leadership Career Pathways program to further develop and engage our teacher leaders. At present we have three Peer Collaborative Teachers. In determining assignments, student need is the primary deciding factor, followed by teacher expertise, teacher interest, and resources of funding and space. Our emphasis on collaboration and meeting the needs of all students informs programming and teaching assignments that emphasize the utilization of teacher partnerships to meet student needs. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). .In addition to working with New Visions to support teachers in curriculum and leadership development through NV Workshops and coaching, partnering with Teachers College at Columbia University (CPET) to support new teachers and developing leaders in one-to-one coaching sessions, sending teachers to Literacy, Math, Special Education, and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  ESL Professional Development sessions sponsored by the DOE, and partnering with the Center for Supportive Schools for socio-emotional strategy development, we have also designed a CTLE-certified professional development plan (again with CPET at TC) that features 5-week inquiry cycles where all teachers and leaders participate in implementing school wide strategies across content areas and use student work and data to inform revisions to the strategy in multiple peer-review sessions before solidifying expectations around how these strategies will be used in our classrooms to support success for all students in achieving city and state standards. Internally the framework of our PD is created by the principal and our CPET consultant and then various stakeholders contribute to the refinement and execution of the plan as the year continues. The principal and school leaders attend professional development sessions facilitated by the district, New Visions, College Access for All, AP for All, and socio-emotional support training sessions by the Center for Supportive Schools (CSS). Additionally, the principal and other school leaders meet one-on-one with the director of CPET (The Center for the Professional Education of Teachers at TC Columbia University) weekly to reflect on professional growth and build leadership capacity. School leaders also meet with the principal in one-on-one consultations regarding their focus work aligned to the CEP. Paraprofessionals participate in the professional development cycles mentioned above and attend SpEd department meetings regarding instruction. Additionally, there are online sessions on SESIS for encounter attendance. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  The decision making process regarding use and selection of assessments, teachers and PD regarding the use of assessment for growth in several systems at MACS: Team structure, Department structure, and Project-Based Learning system. MACS’ staff is composed of 7 teams (Team Leaders, Graduation Team, Freshmen Focus Team, School Data Team, Curriculum Development, Instruction Team and School Culture& Learning Environment Team Leader); these teams meet weekly to discuss student needs strategy implementation, assessment measures, and PD on how to make these measures work in classrooms. In team meetings teachers participate in Project Shares and focus work that emphasizes the review of student work and necessary instructional adjustments, including assessments and the adaptation of PD strategies, to improve student outcomes. Similar processes are followed in department meetings as well. The Projects-Based Learning system at MACS is coordinated by a Projects Committee comprised of teachers from different content areas who review projects (assessments) and inform next steps in PD development for the staff. Supervising all of these structures is our 2 Administrators, Team Leaders and our Center for the Professional Education of Teachers(C.P.E.T) professional development consultant. This team reviews and makes instructional decisions and systems at MACS that consider how to meet student needs in the larger setting of the school, the campus, and the Department of Education. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) x x x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5B,5C 5D, 5E Sections 5B, 5C, 5D Section 5B,5C 5D, 5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal 376,710.00 16,979.00 69,343.00 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 0 12,366.00 0 3,422,051.00 Tax Levy (FSF) Local N/A x N/A x As indicated in sections 5B, 5D: As indicated in Section 5A, 5B, 5C As indicated in Section 5E N/A Section 5B N/A Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D,5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X297, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. [Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies] will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ●providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ●providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ●sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ●hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ●encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ●supporting or hosting Family Day events; ●establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ●encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ●developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ●providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X297, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? The community school (CS) strategy integrates a holistic approach to improve our students’ learning opportunities. Specifically, we collectively implement strategies to engage our students’ academic outcomes through attendance supports, family engagement, health & wellness, and extended day opportunities. Throughout the regular school day, we work with different partners and in collaboration with school staff to provide programs such as: Visual Arts Residencies (Arts Connection), Theater Residencies (Theatre for a New Audience), Violence Prevention & Student Leadership Programming (The Leadership Program) and Lunch Programs (facilitated by DOE staff). During Extended Day time, school staff collaborates with partners to provide programs such as Dance (Arts Connection), Young Men’s Group (The Leadership Program), HERStory (The Leadership Program), Intramural Sports (Morning Program, facilitated by DOE staff), Theater (Brooklyn Youth Company), and academic tutoring (facilitated by DOE staff). In addition to these programs, MACS staff members serve as Mentors to students through three different mentoring structures: Student Success Attendance Team Mentoring, Student Empowerment Team Mentoring (based on the evidence-based Achievement Mentoring model), and Support our Seniors (S.O.S), a mentoring program dedicated entirely to support the current graduating class. Our Student Success team monitors students who are chronically absent or at risk of becoming chronically absent. As a result of this comprehensive work over the last several years, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  MACS’ overall Year - to - Date (Y.T.D) attendance rate has increased 5.4%, reaching an all-time high of 84% for the 2017-18 school year. Furthermore, MACS has experienced a decrease in chronic absenteeism (as measured by percent of students with less than overall attendance of 90%) by approximately 11.5% from 2015-16 to 2016-17. Final chronic absenteeism rate is not yet available for the 2017-18 school year. The community school strategy also focuses on collaborating with school staff on academic outcomes related to Regents scores and college readiness. Specifically, MACS has partnered with organizations such as A List Education for SAT Prep Support and Regents Tutoring, Purpose Tutors for Regents Tutoring, and most recently, with College Confident for the 2018-19 school year to directly support college readiness. Academic success cannot be achieved without the direct engagement and partnership of families. Therefore, we have focused our family services in a way that allows us to best serve and communicate with families about academic progress and engagement opportunities. MACS has continuously collaborated with families, staff, and students to think more creatively about how to partner and collaborate with families. MACS staff regularly uses K-involved, a text and email messaging platform, to communicate with families on a regular basis about academic progress, attendance, and engagement opportunities. Finally, our health and wellness services provided through Astor Services for Children and Families, Montefiore, and our DOE Social Worker address the physical, social, and emotional well-being of our students and families. These services support our students in achieving personal success socio-emotionally, and also allow them to focus more on their academic success. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, overall attendance will increase by 2%. By June 2019, Chronic Absenteeism (as measured by % of students with less than 90% overall attendance) will decrease by 3%. By June 2019, at least 90% of Peer Group Connection (P.G.C) participants (9th graders) will demonstrate an overall attendance rate of at least 90%. By June 2019, at least 95% of P.G.C leaders will demonstrate an overall attendance rate of at least 90%. By June 2019, the college index (combined college preparatory score and college readiness score) will increase by 2%. By June 2019, at least 85% of Cohort 2018 students engaged in S.O.S (Support our Seniors) will demonstrate an overall attendance rate of at least 90%. By June 2019, 100% of families will receive regular communications via text message informing them of (1) their child’s progress and (2) community school opportunities for engagement and leadership. By June 2019, at least 30 students will be actively engaged in an after school SAT prep class, with a class attendance of at least 80% for all students. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? By providing comprehensive supports and services for students and families to the highest degree of fidelity, students will attend school every day and be actively engaged academically and socio-emotionally. Students will be met with the supports they need to be successful, and much of that success will be seen through academic goals related to Regents Scores, Credit Accumulation, and College Readiness (college-ready math & ELA scores, AP courses, College Now courses, and SAT Scores). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  By focusing on increasing overall attendance and decreasing chronic abseentism, students will be in school more frequently and will be more actively engaged. They will be less likely to fall behind and will thus succeed academically to ensure an on-time graduation. By continuing to focus on how to share data with families and ensure that they are partners in their child’s academic success, families will be more equipped to support their children at home and students will be more successful in school. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Lead CBO (CSS) Target Population 9th graders Lead CBO (CSS) 60-90% chronically absent students Kinvolved All students & families Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal Peer Group Connection Peer Leadership Program. Trained 11th & 12th peer leaders support all 9th graders thoroughly weekly outreach sessions. By June 2019, at least 90% of PGC participants (9th graders) will demonstrate an overall attendance rate of at least 90%. By June 2019, at least 95% of PGC leaders will demonstrate an overall attendance rate of at least 90%. By June 2019, 80% of mentors engaged in Achievement Mentoring (AM) will implement AM with fidelity and 80% of mentees will miss fewer days than the previous school year. Achievement Mentoring -- evidence-based mentoring for high-need students; weekly positive behavioral reinforcement mentoring sessions; monthly positive parent outreach. Communication and attendance-tracking system as a way for school staff to engage in two-way communication with students and families. By June 2019, 100% of families will receive regular communications via text message informing them of (1) their child’s progress and (2) community school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  Astor Services for Children and Families Families in need of resource connections Astor Services for Children and Families Students with mental health needs Astor Family Resource Specialist supports students and families with any resources in and outside of the building. Astor FRS also focuses on supporting students with attendance <50%. Astor Clinician supports students who are referred through the referral system with individual counseling and student groups. opportunities for engagement and leadership. The intended, specific, measurable impact of parents and families receiving regular communication is families will feel more connected to, and invested in, their child's learning and as a result, student attendance and academic outcomes will improve. The success of these initiatives will be measured by Family responses on the Learning Environment Survey, as well as school level data (attendance, credit accumulation, Regents exam scores, graduation rate etc). School-based adults will understand how to identify family needs and make appropriate referrals to Astor. Throughout the 2018-19 school year, 100% of referrals made through the MACS referral system will be completed (matched to the appropriate support service) as measured by the referral tracker. The intended outcome is that all students will receive needed services and as a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  result, students receiving services will feel more connected to, and engaged in, school. Attendance and academic outcomes will also improve. By June 2019, at least 30 students will be actively engaged in an after school SAT prep class, with a class attendance of at least 80% for all students. By June 2019, students who participate in the SPI project will demonstrate a more positive perception of self and of their writing as measured by impact surveys distributed to students before the project and after completion of the project A List Education All students (as needed) A List Education will provided a dedicated SAT Prep class for 11th grade students CPET All students (as needed) CPET will provide a variety of support for students and school staff: Literacy Coaching Leadership Coaching Student Press Initiative (SPI) Projects for 3 different groups Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Community Partnership will leverage all partnerships with additional CBOs to achieve the summative SMART goals and implement the action plan. For example, all partners will be fully informed of all goals, specifically those that directly tie into the programs each partner is providing. In terms of scheduling:  Achievement Mentors will need 20 minutes per week per mentee built into their scheduled school day responsibilities.  PGC requires a daily course programmed for selected 11th and 12th grade peer leaders and regular outreach sessions for 9th grade students within the regular school day. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. The full-time Community School Director (CSD) was hired in partnership with school leadership and the SLT. The CSD is responsible for the day-to-day management of the community school strategy. The CSD is a "community organizer,” facilitating and providing leadership for the collaborative process of developing a continuum of services for children, families, and community members. The CSD drives development of community school action plans and planning for sustainability. The CSD tracks the school’s progress against performance goals, reviews school data, supports program evaluation activities, and manages partnerships. The CSD will ensure that the community school strategy is implemented at exceptional levels of quality with full support, buy-in, and regular communication with stakeholders across the school community. Specific position responsibilities will include: • Build and maintain relationships with administration, faculty, staff, students, parents, and community partners • Organize and expand upon the membership of the Community School Team (CST) to include diverse school community stakeholders and CBOs • Conduct a needs assessment process, including: reviewing school and student-level data; conducting focus groups with parents, students, faculty, staff, administrators, and community partners; and reviewing and/or conducting school climate and culture survey at key times throughout the school year to inform continuous improvement • Conduct a community asset assessment to identify viable partnerships that can meet the needs of students and families of the school community, including ongoing partnership evaluation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  • Recruit and develop partnership agreements with people and community organizations willing to offer programs and services for students and families at the school in accordance with identified needs • Identify evidence and research-based practices and/or partnerships that address priority areas for the community school strategy, which may include but are not limited to: Parent/Family Engagement; Community Engagement; Youth Development; Academic Rigor and Instructional Practices; Health and Mental Health; Tutoring; After school programming; Mentoring; and Early Childhood • Develop, maintain, and publicize a schedule of programs and activities offered at the school • Implement and maintain a process that encourages referrals to programs and services offered at the school • Identify needs of chronically absent students, apply interventions, and track and monitor impact of interventions on weekly basis, as part of weekly Student Success Summit  Collect and monitor program implementation data and student data for each partnership that allow easy data analysis and interaction by the SLT, CST, and other school stakeholders Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. All community partners are actively engaged in understanding and processing school improvement goals through partner meetings, and in collaboration with the S.LT. Partners include: 1. Astor - mental health services; family resources 2. K-involved - family engagement 3. C.S.S - youth development, student leadership through P.G.C 4. C.P.E.T (Center for the Professional Education of Teachers) - youth development through literacy and instruction C.S.D focus areas for the 18-19 school year include: (1) decreasing chronic absenteeism (2) family engagement and (3) youth development/student leadership/social and emotional student supports. 2. The Community School Team will include: principal, parent leaders, teachers, C.S.D, Astor clinician, representatives from C.P.E.T, K-involved, and other community partners. A meeting agenda will be provided prior to each meeting via email to all participants. Meetings will begin with a team-building “check-in” and proceed to review progress on community school goals. Meeting structures will be implemented (such as pair share, small group activities, etc.) to ensure equity of voice in providing feedback and input. Each meeting will end with time for reflection on the meeting, identifying “takeaways” and an email will be sent to the group by the C.S.D recapping the outcomes and next steps identified in the meeting. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  3. The Student Sorter will be used on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis to identify and connect students (both subgroups and individuals) in need of personalized/individualized supports. Prevention initiatives and intervention initiatives will be tracked in the Student Sorter and this data will be analyzed regularly, in partnership with the C.S.T and other key school stakeholders, to evaluate effectiveness and to implement new strategies as needed. Partner organizations will also be required to provide monthly reports documenting progress against stated outcomes and these updates will be discussed in monthly check-in meetings with the C.S.D. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.  Achievement Mentors will need 20 minutes per week per mentee built into their scheduled school day responsibilities.  PGC requires a daily course programmed for selected 11th and 12th grade peer leaders and regular outreach sessions for 9th grade students within the regular school day. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates.  Peer Group Connection (P.G.C) -- faculty will be trained during 4-day, 3-night summer training and through five additional trainings during the 2018-19 school year. The daily peer leadership course for selected 11th and 12th grade peer leaders will begin in September 2018 and 9th grade outreach sessions will begin in October 2018 and will continue through June 2019.  Achievement Mentoring -- a kick-off luncheon will occur in late September 2018/early October 2018. Weekly mentoring will start no later than October 2018 and will continue through June 2019.  Astor -- full-time clinician and family resource specialist will provide support July 1, 2018 - June 30, 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The direct instruction supplemental program at Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies (MACS) includes Extended Day and Saturday School programming. Extended Day and Saturday School programming provides students with additional academic and linguistic support to complete work from content area classes and prepare for Regents exams. ENL teachers work with content teachers to prepare additional materials for students based on need and language skill, such as home language support. The purpose of the Extended Day and Saturday School programs is to help ELL students to improve their literacy skills and content area understanding to ensure success in content classes and on Regents examinations. All students are encouraged to attend Extended Day and Saturday School programming, including all current and former ELLs who are given an individualized prep schedule which specifies time and location of Extended Day and Saturday School sessions based on a review of student transcripts and English language proficiency levels. Extended Day sessions will take place in the ENL resource room from 3:15pm-4:15pm every Monday and Wednesday during the 2018-2019 school year. Extended Day sessions will begin Monday, October 1, 2018 and continue through June 5, 2019 for a total of 60 one-hour sessions. Saturday School will take place on select Saturdays during the fall and spring semesters from 9:00am-12:00pm for a total of `14 sessions. Instruction for Extended Day and Saturday School programs will take place primarily in English with appropriate differentiation and scaffolding based on the student's English language proficiency. However, if a student needs additional home language support, ENL teachers will provide oral interpretation and/or written translations in students’ home languages of the content, directions, or sample work in order to support all of the students' languages. Content teachers will coordinate with the ENL teachers in the Extended Day/Saturday School programs to ensure that all levels of ELLs are receiving the appropriate supports for their English proficiency level based on their most recent NYSESLAT/NYSITELL scores. All teachers providing instruction are content and/or ENL certified. These teachers are Ms. Ahmed (US History), Ms. Martin (Geometry/Algebra), Mr. Miller (Global), Ms. Crawford (ELA), Ms. Sterling (Living Environment), Ms. Cruz (Living Environment), and Mr. Chi (Earth Science). The certified ENL teachers responsible for providing English development instruction as well as the language support in the content area sessions are Ms. Demeroukas-Fetterman and Mr. Chamoff. The materials used for Extended Day programming will include materials from daily instruction in order to support students in their content area classes as well as supplemental materials such as bilingual glossaries, modified English texts, and texts in the students' home language. The materials used for Saturday School programming will include materials that are supplemental 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information and distinct from those used for daily instruction in order to best target areas of growth for students based on Regents data. These will include practice problems from past Regents exams in that content area in both English and the home language (whenever possible), supplemental texts (listed below), and visual aids. The following texts will be used as supplemental materials for Social Studies: La Historia Mundial Para Edad Universal de La Edad del Imperialismo a la Actualidad (Globe Fearon, Pearson Learning Group), Historia universal (Holt, Rinehart, and WInston), Historia de Estados Unidos (Holt, Rinehart, and Winston), Global History and Geography (Pearson Prentice Hall).The following texts will be used as supplemental materials for Science: Living Environment: Regents Review Practice Tests (Topical Review Book Company), The Living Environment (Pearson), The Living Environment (Holt), El medio ambiente y la vida (Holt).The following texts will be used as supplemental materials for Math: Algebra Integrada (Prentice Hall Matematicas).The following texts will be used as additional bilingual resources: Word to Word Bilingual Dictionary: Spanish Edition (Bilingual Dictionaries, Inc.), Arabic Practical Dictionary (Hippocrene Books), Albanian Practical Dictionary (Hippocrene Books), Merriam-Webster's Pocket French-English Dictionary (Merriam-Webster). Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The professional development program will be designed in partnership with the Center for the Professional Education of Teachers at Teachers College, Columbia University. The professional development will focus on ENL in General Education classes. ENL teachers will work with CPET faculty, led by Dr. Roberta Kang, to design a two-hour professional development series that addresses how to differentiate effectively for all levels on ENL students as well as how to develop successful co-teaching partnerships and structures. Teachers will be able to apply for two CTLE-certified hours upon completion of the professional development. As of May 2018, 19% of the student population at MACS are classified as ELLs and a majority of teachers at MACS utilize co-teaching models in their content area classes. Additionally, MACS already has established partnerships with CPET, meaning that workshops will be specifically tailored to our school’s community. By allowing all staff members to participate in the professional development and apply for CTLE hours, teachers will be able to work toward acquiring the required hours needed to maintain professional licensing. The professional development series will take place during two Tuesdays of the 2018-2019 school year, each session being schedule from 3:15-4:15. All staff, including Extended Day and Saturday School teachers, will attend. Topics will include the following; Best practices for English as a New Language (ENL), Co-teaching strategies, structures and supports, Effective literacy strategies for ELLs/MLLs, and Scaffolds that support ELLs/MLLs in mastering core content. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: As part of our Community School mission, MACS has created many initiatives for Parent Engagement. These initiatives are designed to help parents support their children academically, provide immigration counseling, and engage families in school wide events. During the 2018-2019 school year, we will also be providing free and confidential Immigration Services Clinics through Action NYC, part of the Mayor's Office of Immigrant Affairs (MOIA), and arranged through our partnership with the Center for Supportive Schools (CSS). There will be five seven-hour sessions in total starting in August and ending in June. These services will be open to former students, current students, family members, and community members. Notifications will be sent and posted in Spanish, French, and English. Team members from Action NYC consist of paralegals and attorneys, with members who speak Spanish, French, Haitian-Creole, and English.Parent engagement has also been embedded in the MACS Annual Community Social (M.A.C.S.) in May, which is organized through our partnership with the Center for Supportive Schools. During this forum, parents, students, teachers, business leaders, and other community members meet to discuss the needs and goals of the school. Parents' input is extremely valuable to determining what types of services and partnerships our school would like to develop using local resources. Invitations to the forum are sent in the home languages of students, which have been translated either by staff or the Translation and Interpretation Unit. During the event, translators are assigned to groups with parents who prefer to communicate in a language other than English.Additional opportunities for parent engagement include Honors Night and Roundtables. Honors Night occurs in June and allows parents to honor selected students who have earned recognition for their academic achievements. Roundtables occurs twice a year, once in February and once in June. Parents are invited to attend Roundtables events and participate as project judges. Records of attendance for all of the aforementioned parent engagement workshops will include sign-in sheets with the names of participants as well as copies of invitations sent in English and students' home language. These records will be stored in Room 200. As mentioned previously, translators on staff will be available for written and oral communicated in parents' preferred languages and any additional translation needs will be provided through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Morris Academy for Collaborative Studies Borough Bronx School Number 297 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Matthew Mazzaroppi Coach Roberta Kang ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman Teacher/Subject Area Norma Cruz/Science Teacher/Subject Area John Gowan/Social Studies Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Hoek Choi Coach N/A School Counselor Christopher O'mara Parent Maria Rodriguez Parent Coordinator Danielle Patillo Field Support Center Staff Member New Visions: Samuel Rodriguez Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 89  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 392 Total number of ELLs 86 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.94% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? MACS uses several assessment tools to guide instructional planning for ELLs, including NYSESLAT/NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, DYO assessments, ELA MOSL, and Midterm Regents Assessments. At the beginning of the school year, NYSESLAT data, Spanish LAB results, and scores from past Regents exams are used to plan for any necessary pull-out interventions for Entering and Emerging students who may need additional home language support. These data are also used to inform grouping and assign appropriately differentiated tasks for all levels of ELLs in stand alone ENL classes and co-taught content area classes. Other assessments are embedded into our curricula, such as DYO and Midterm Regents Assessments. During the Midterm Regents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 90  Assessments, students are given past versions of Regents exams. The purpose is twofold, to help students get accustomed to the rigor of the tests as well as to provide crucial formative assessment data. Data from DYOs and the Midterm Regents Examinations are used to make modifications to instruction for ELLs by highlighting areas of focus so that teachers can make informed decisions about what content and language should be taught. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? To support this effort, the ENL department is provided with data from all of these assessments in order to inform instructional planning. Departments meet weekly to design curricula, instruction, and assessments. Sometimes an ENL staff member will join another department in order to provide additional input. When formative assessment data is collected by departments, such as DYO results or scores from Midterm Regents Assessments, the ENL department is also given copies of the data for analysis. This allows from data to be analyzed from multiple perspectives before being used in instructional planning. In addition to departments, specialized teams also meet weekly to further develop highly effective instructional practices that can be implemented across all content areas. ENL teachers are active participants in all of these structures, from designing instruction to analyzing formative assessment data, thereby ensuring that the needs of ELLs are being met throughout the year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? MACS uses a variety of summative assessments to identify baseline, progress, and areas of need. To establish baseline, ENL teachers use data from previous Regents exams, grade data, and NYSESLAT. This informs initial planning for instruction. To check students’ progress, Roundtables projects are designed to meet benchmarks aligned with Common Core Learning Standards and Regents examinations. These projects are monitored throughout the semester by the content teacher and the ENL teacher. A summative assessment in the form of project presentations allows for teachers to identify areas of progress as well as areas of need. In addition to Roundtables projects, teachers design final examinations that are submitted to department leaders for review. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once summative data has been gathered, administration and grade team leaders flag students who are either failing or in danger of failing a course or Regents exam. The ENL department identifies ELLs and former ELLs who may benefit from additional instruction and encourage these students to attend Extended Day and Saturday School programming. The ENL department also reevaluates the schedule for pulling out small groups of students to focus on specific content, skills, and language. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. MACS uses NYSESLAT and Regents data in order to evaluate and inform ELL programs. At the end of each school year, ENL teachers use the previous year’s NYSESLAT scores, the ELL Data Analysis Tool, Regents results, and grade data to predict English language proficiency levels for current ELLs. These predictions are then used for drafting the initial program for the following school year. Once the NYSESLAT scores are released to ATS, ENL teachers work with administration and our programmer (Elizabeth Halo) to create the appropriate number of course sections to meet the needs of all levels of ELLs and then assign ENL teachers to these courses accordingly. Students are placed into course sections based on input from ENL teachers (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman, Jordan Chamoff, Katya Isayev) and guidance counselors (Carly Klareich and Christopher O’Mara). 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 91  To disseminate these findings, the ENL coordinator (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) shares scores from the NYSESLAT with administration, programming, and guidance counselors in order to create ELL programs for the upcoming school year. The ENL department also reviews the NYSESLAT scores in order to determine which ELLs need stand alone ENL classes and if additional sections should be added to the teaching schedule. Regents scores are disseminated by administration to teachers as soon as they are available. Content and ENL teachers use these scores to make decisions regarding student programming while also considering instructional adjustments for the upcoming school year. As part of our effort to develop literacy skills across content areas, department leaders meet to discuss possible strategies that can be adjusted and implemented in a variety of content courses. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Integrated classes are offered for specific classes based on the number of ELLs scheduled for them. Typically, ELLs are all programmed for one section of the course, sometimes two depending on the number of ELLs who require the course. Only in the 9th grade do ELLs travel as a heterogeneous block and take Algebra, Global History, Living Environment courses together. In 10th, 11th, and 12th grades, students are ungraded and grouped heterogeneously. These students are assigned to courses based on credit accumulation and Regents requirements, and ENL teachers are then assigned to these sections based on student need. Homogeneous standalone ENL classes are offered for beginner (Entering to Emerging), intermediate (Emerging to Transitioning), and advanced (Expanding to Commanding) ELLs. For Entering and Emerging, students are assigned in order to meet minute requirements as per CR Part 154.2. For Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding ELLs, the ENL department uses data from EDAT to determine which students would most likely benefit from additional standalone support. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the Standalone ENL program model, minutes are delivered according to the results of the most recent NYSESLAT. A list of ELL students is generated. ENL teachers record the number of class period he/she is assigned to the student and the type of service that is provided, either integrated ENL or standalone ENL. Typically, when an ENL teacher is assigned to an integrated ENL course, the teacher is assigned to co-teach all five days of the school week. Since most classes are a single 46-minute period, ELL students in the courses receive approximately 230 minutes of integrated ENL minutes per course. To meet the requirement for Entering and Emerging ELLs who must receive integrated ENL minutes within their ELA classes, ELLs at these 2018-19 SCEP-FL 92  proficiency levels are assigned to the ELL section of their ELA class based on their grade level. A member of the ENL department is assigned to each grade level of ELA. Standalone ENL classes typically run four days a week for one period, so ELLs programmed for these courses receive 184 minutes of standalone ENL minutes. Depending on the need of the students, some ELLs are programmed for more than the required number of minutes. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the Standalone ENL program model, core content is delivered either in Spanish, English, or both using written or oral language. For students whose home language is not Spanish, supplemental materials in that student’s home language are provided. In order to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of Common Core Learning Standards, ENL teachers and content teachers co-plan instruction to ensure that students’ proficiency levels are taken into account and that appropriate scaffolds are incorporated into the learning plan. All teachers incorporate elements of translanguaging into instruction by giving opportunities for ELLs to use their home language. For example, teachers might have students read in the home language and then respond in English or the home language as well. This way, teachers can teach skills and content that are Common Core aligned while also taking into consideration the needs of newcomer ELLs who need appropriate sheltering techniques. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To evaluate ELLs appropriately in their languages throughout the year, ENL teachers create home language assessments for their stand alone ENL classes. These assessments are used to gather information on students’ prior knowledge about a subject, assessing a skill such as writing with evidence, or determining if students’ have basic knowledge of grammar in their home language. Students can also receive content-related assessments written in their home language in their content area classes and a bilingual teacher assists in grading the assessment. If there are no staff in-house to read and evaluate an assessment completed in the home language, then the Language Access Coordinator (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit in order to accurately assess the work. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. After a student is identified as SIFE, we schedule ENL teachers to provide additional stand alone class periods during the week for homework help and content assistance. The ENL teacher determines which students to put in a small group, and those students are pulled from their content classes 1-2 periods a week. During these periods, the ENL teacher focuses on fundamental skills related to the course (such as addition and subtraction for SIFE students in a math class) as well as developing students’ background knowledge. Students may be taught in the home language if the instructor is capable of doing so. In addition, these students are typically allowed to work in the home language before transitioning into English. b. For newcomers, especially students who are assessed as Entering or Emerging ELLs based on the NYSITELL, we place the student in that grade’s ELL block or sections of the appropriate courses designated for ELLs. Depending on need, the student may receive 1-2 periods of stand alone ENL in their daily schedule. Due to the high overlap of SIFE students who are also newcomers at the beginning stages of English language proficiency, these students are also pulled out in small groups from content classes as needed to develop basic content knowledge and skills. In addition to small group instruction and interventions, these students can be given materials in the home language as well as modified versions of assignments or alternate assignments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 93  c. For developing students, we use a combination of Integrated ENL and Stand alone ENL models to meet these students’ needs. The ENL department meets at the beginning of the school year to identify developing ELLs and determine the best schedule, sometimes assigning a stand alone ENL course based on the student’s level and degree of need. Differentiation for these students can include small group instruction, modified texts, graphic organizers, modified or alternate assignments, and translanguaging. d. For long term students, we use the Integrated ENL model with Stand alone ENL model as necessary. Similar to developing ELLs, the ENL department also identifies these students at the beginning of the school year and determines the best schedule based on the student’s level and degree of need. Oftentimes long term students are also classified as Students with Disabilities, so the ENL Department also confers with the Special Education department and uses these students’ IEPs to differentiate instruction. Differentiation for these students can include small group instruction, modified texts, graphic organizers, modified or alternate assignments, and translanguaging. e. For former ELLs, the ENL department uses Regents scores and grade data to determine which Integrated ENL courses would most benefit these students. Typically, former ELLs in 9th grade are either assigned to the 9th grade ELL block or scheduled for the advanced stand alone ENL class for additional support. Students in 10th, 11th, and 12th grades are usually still assigned to a grade-appropriate ELA class with an Integrated ENL model. Students may also receive additional support from an ENL teacher in select content area classes. In all of these courses, material is differentiated based on student need. Differentiation for former ELLs includes modified texts, graphic organizers, and translanguaging. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies to provide ELL-SWDs access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development include multilingual word walls, translanguaging, cloze sentences, paragraph structure templates, annotation strategies, projects based learning, and vocabulary development strategies such as the Frayer model. In addition to following the student’s IEP, ELL-SWDs are given multiple points of access during a lesson as well as options for demonstrating his/her understanding of the skills and content being taught during a lesson. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? All ELL-SWDs are evaluated by both ENL and SPED departments throughout the school year. The ENL department provides NYSESLAT scores to determine how many minutes the student needs, while the SPED department provides information regarding IEP goals. These evaluations are used to determine the schedule that best meets the needs of the student in the least restrictive environment possible. If it is decided that the students’ ENL needs are greater than their special education need, then the student is put in ELL sections of content area courses and assigned a stand alone ENL class. If the student’s special education needs are greater than their ELL needs, then the reverse is true. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention programs take place during and outside of the official school day. During school, small groups of students are pulled from math and other core content classes to work on language skills and content understanding. These classes are typically taught bilingually in English and Spanish. For students whose home language is not Spanish, printed materials and supplemental materials in the student’s home language are used in tandem with English instruction. There is also Extended Day tutoring and Saturday School programming available outside of the regular school day. Extended Day tutoring is available for all ELL students in all content areas, including Global History and Geography, United States History and Government, Algebra I, Geometry, ELA, and Living Environment. Typically an ENL teacher is on site to tutor for all subject areas and the services are offered either in English or Spanish. Saturday School programming is available select Saturdays during the Fall and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 94  Spring semesters. The focus of Saturday School programming is typically Regents prep, offering additional tutoring for all of the courses listed above. Depending on the students in attendance, an ENL teacher is on site to tutor for all subject areas either in the form of Integrated ENL or Stand Alone ENL. These services are also offered either in English or Spanish. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? During the 2016-2017 school year, we noticed that many ELLs are over serviced, with several exceeding 1000 minutes per week. This occurred mostly in the 9th grade ELL block, where students received Integrated ENL in three core content areas in addition to a Stand Alone ENL course. In the upcoming school year, ENL will design a teaching schedule that more effectively intervenes with high risk students based on results from the EDAT. Specifically, ENL teachers will target Entering/Emerging ELLs and long term ELLs in the form of small group instruction 1-2 times a week. In addition to scheduling improvements, curricular improvements will also be implemented during the upcoming school year. ENL teachers will be partaking in a Curriculum Development program funded by Teaching Residents @ Teachers College, Columbia University (TR@TC). The goal of this project will be to more closely align the curricula of stand alone ENL classes at MACS while integrating differentiation appropriate to three discrete levels of ELLs: beginner, intermediate, and advanced. In doing so, the ENL department hopes to show growth in literacy skills that will benefit the student in a range of content areas as well as on the NYSESLAT. The curricula will all focus on similar themes, including immigration, language practices, and community advocacy. Interwoven throughout the curriculum will be a continuation of the work done with the Student Press Initiative through Teachers College, Columbia University in the form of a professionally published anthology featuring students in all three levels of the stand alone ENL courses. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs or services for ELLs have been discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded all of the same opportunities to participate in any and all school programs. There are a variety of after school programs offered that are available to ELLs, including Extended Day tutoring, clubs, and various sports teams. Information about these programs is always translated into the home languages of students and their families. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of materials are used to support ELLs at MACS. In core content areas, materials include: Spanish-language textbooks, graphic organizers, guided notes, modified articles from sites such as NewsELA.com, materials translated into students’ home languages (powerpoints, handouts, worksheets, assessments), content-specific videos in English and/or Spanish with subtitles, Smartboards, Chromebooks, desktop computers, posters, vocabulary journals, English learner dictionaries, and Regents-based bilingual glossaries. Additional language materials include: bilingual dictionaries in Spanish, French, Arabic, Albanian, and Mandinka; leveled books in English and Spanish; novels in Spanish, French, and Arabic; Visions book series (including text, activity book, CDs); and NYSESLAT prep materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In Integrated ENL settings, home language support varies based on the needs of students and the objectives of the class. Typically, whole class instruction is delivered in English unless there is a high need for bilingual English-Spanish instruction. Instructional materials are provided in English, but ELLs may also receive materials in the home language if they are Entering or Emerging in order to facilitate understanding. In certain cases, higher level ELLs may receive materials in the home language in order to continue supporting the development of their home language, which is one of the key principles of translanguaging. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 95  To ensure that all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels, the ENL coordinator (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) reviews the programming for all current ELLs at the beginning of every semester. Programming decisions regarding newcomer ELLs must be based off of information gathered during the intake process, specifically the Home Language Information Survey and interview with the parent/guardian. Students are placed with the cohort appropriate for the students’ age while also considering factors such as English language proficiency and previous education. Next, the ENL department ensures that programming meets the needs of ELLs across content and grade level, with the idea that most ELLs experience a gradual release of support further on in their high school career, with more or less support based on the most recent NYSESLAT results. The 9th grade ELL block receives Integrated ENL support in Global History, ELA, and Algebra. A majority of ELLs in 10th grade receive receive Integrated ENL support in Geometry, US History, and ELA. ELLs in 11th grade receive Integrated ENL support in US History and ELA. ELLs in 12th grade receive Integrated ENL support in Government/Economics and ELA. Additionally, through our partnership with CUNY-NYSIEB, the ENL department provides resources specifically designed for ENL students to use as mature reading materials for Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? MACS has one floor allocated for classrooms and offices within the Morris Campus. The campus contains four high schools plus a child care center. There are numerous shared spaces within the campus, including: a gymnasium, a library, an auditorium, a cafeteria, and a community garden. The principals from all schools on the campus meet regularly to discuss how to share these resources so that the needs of all students are met. Schools are assigned specific periods to use the gymnasium and the cafeteria. Other shared spaces, such as the auditorium and the library, can be reserved in advance. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). To assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year, a Freshman Orientation is held before the first day of school. The orientation begins with an introduction from the principal (Matthew Mazzaroppi) and the assistant principals (Hoek Choi and Xiomara Gonzalez). ELLs and their families then visit a teacher representative from each content area in order to learn the expectations of the class and become familiar with the layout of the floor. At the end of the orientation, ENL teachers introduce themselves to families of new ELLs and discuss ENL programming at MACS. New ELLs who enroll throughout the school year go through the intake process with guidance counselors (Christopher O’Mara and Carly Klareich), the ENL coordinator (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman), and, if needed, an interpreter. The ENL coordinator administers the Home Language Information Survey in English and the parent/guardian’s home language to determine the home language of the student. If the student qualifies for the NYSITELL, then an ENL teacher administers the assessment and reviews the results with the parent. If the student is an ELL, the family is shown a video about the types of ELL programs offered in NYCDOE. From there, the ENL coordinator discusses the best option for the student with the family. After the intake process is complete, an ENL teacher provides the family with updates regarding their child’s transition and academic performance. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLs are offered Spanish and French online electives through Apex Learning. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 96  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? All staff attend Professional Development workshops every Tuesday after school from 3:00 to 3:55. The focus of these workshops is literacy across the content areas and differentiation. Included in all workshops are discussions on how to effectively differentiate instruction for ELLs. These sessions include ENL teachers, subject area teachers, special Education teachers, guidance counselors, paraprofessionals, and administrators. The professional development workshops are typically led by a combination of the follwing: principal Matthew Mazzaroppi, assistant principal Hoek Choi, assistant principal Xiomara Gonzalez. PD cycles typically run six weeks. For each PD cycle, a literacy strategy is presented to the staff and discussed. Next, teachers must plan to implement the strategy in their classroom within a certain time frame. Teachers bring their observations and student work samples to the next cycle to discuss with groups of other teachers either within the same department or from different department. Teachers write a reflection on the strategy and any changes they plan to make before implementing it a second time. The AP keep a binder of the sign-in sheets with the lessons taught to the staff and handouts that were given out to staff. At the end of the workshops the hours are totaled by Roberta Kang, coach, and she produces certificates for the teachers as proof they completed the 7.5 hours of training (usually teachers complete 12 hours). Strategies are not content area specific and can be used in any classroom. The workshop teacher provides the staff with examples as to how the strategies can be used. During the 2014-2015, 2015-2016, 2016-2017 school year, ENL teachers were offered professional development opportunities through Teachers College, Columbia University. Specifically, ENL teachers (Katya Isayev, Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman, Jordan Chamoff) attended book writing workshops to learn how to engage ELLs in creative writing while also engaging them in Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL Department plans to partake in this workshop again in the upcoming school year. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To assist ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school, several events are organized at the school. In late August/early September, students are invited to a Freshman Orientation in order to become familiar with schoolwide curricula, school layout, faculty, and extracurricular opportunities at the school. During the 2016-2017 school year, staff were provided training to engage at-risk student in counseling sessions. These brief sessions are set to take place at least once a week with the teacher's 2-3 assigned mentees. During these sessions, teachers will check-in with students about their academic life at MACS and create obtainable, realistic goals for the student to improve aspects of their performance such as attendance, completing homework assignments, and behavior. In addition, MACS has launched a program title Peer Group Connection. All freshmen, including ELLs, are assigned to an upperclassman mentor who provides socioemotional as well as academic support. This group is supervised by the principal (Matthew Mazzaroppi) and the 9th grade ELA teacher (Christina Crawford). At MACS, a minimum of 15% of the required professional development hours for all teachings are dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learns. This is met through weekly professional development sessions after school on Tuesdays from 3:00-4:00. Records of professional development are kept through agendas created by administration as well as a record of attendance. For all day in-house professional development, teachers are provided a certificate attesting to their attendance and number of PD hours obtained. For all ENL teachers, a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional developments hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learns. This is met through weekly professional development sessions after school on Tuesdays from 3:00-3:55. The ENL Department provides input for the type of training to be 2018-19 SCEP-FL 97  administered during the weekly PDs, including co-teaching strategies and how to integrate language and content instruction. In addition to the in-house PD, outside professional development opportunities offered through a variety of outlets, such as Teachers College, Columbia University, the Center for Supportive Schools, the Affinity Group, the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support, and New Visions. To determine which outside professional opportunities ENL teachers will attend, the ENL Coordinator (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman), the ENL Department Leader (Katya Isayev), and the principal (Matthew Mazzaroppi) aggregate PD opportunities that offer training in the areas of co-teaching and integrating language and content instruction. The ENL Department decides who will attend which PDs in order to meet the requirement of 50% total hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The school meets individually with parent or guardians of English language learners at least once a year, in addition to parent-teacher conferences, initial parent orientations, or other scheduled meetings provided for parents or guardians to discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas. These additional meetings include the school staff necessary to sufficiently inform the parents or guardians about the child's language development in all content areas in English, including but not limited to the ENL Coordinator (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) and the student's primary ENL teacher (Katya Isayev, Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman, Jordan Chamoff). The meetings will be conducted with a qualified interpreter/translator in the language or mode of communication the parent or guardian best understands. The school currently retain in-house interpreters who are bilingual in Spanish-English and French-English. Additional interpreters will be requested from the Translation & Interpretation Unit if needed. To ensure that all ELLs' parents are met with individually throughout the school year, the ENL Coordinator (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) will first create a list of ELL and ELL-SWD students, since there is significant overlap between students with IEPs who are also ELL. Using this list and coordinating with the Special Education Coordinator, the ENL Coordinator plans to meet with parents after the annual IEP meeting for an ELL-SWD. The remaining students will be contacted by a member of the ENL department via phone call or Kinvolved messaging system to set up a meeting appointment. These calls and messages will be logged on the MACS Parent Outreach Log and a letter will be sent home to remind the family of the appointment time. The letter will be given to the Parent Coordinator (Danielle Patillo) who will mail the letter home. A copy of the letter will be kept in the student's file in 209B. During the meetings, the ENL coordinator and other ENL teachers who work with the student will review the goals of the ENL program with the parent as well as the student's most recent NYSESLAT results. Using this data, the team will decide on reasonable language proficiency goals for the student. If a parent is unable to meet in person, then the meeting will be conducted either via phone call or Kinvolved messages. All interactions with parents regarding annual individual meetings will be documented with the date and kept in a digital record on the MACS domain. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are involved in a number of different activities and systems including the Parent Association, Freshman Orientation,Fall and Spring Roundtables, Honors Night, Back to School Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences, APTT meetings, and the annual MACS Community School Forum. Parents are sent information about these events in their home language and English. Thanks to our increased outreach, ELL parent attendance has grown significantly at these events. At all events there are Spanish-speaking staff available to help facilitate conversations. Specifically at Freshman Orientation and the annual MACS Community School Forum, ELL parents are grouped together in order to provide a space to discuss issues specifically related to our ELL population. At our upcoming Roundtables events, which occur on Chancellor's Days, we plan to incorporate a special ELL Parent Luncheon into the day's activities to showcase ELL projects to parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 98  Our continued goal for the upcoming year to provide more parent outreach through calls and letters home in order to frequently update parents about their student's progress academically, linguistically, and socioemotionally. In tandem with the ENL Department, MACS utilizes several teacher-led teams to further involve parents. The Freshman Focus Team works to introduce 9th grade students, including ELLs, to the culture of academic rigor and socioemotional wellness. The Student Empowerment (Culture) and Student Empowerment (Academics) teams work together focusing on 10th and 11th grade students to ensure that they are meeting their credit requirements for graduation as well as developing socioemotionally before transitioning into senior year. Part of these teams' mission is to reach out to parents with specific concerns about students, especially ELLs, who often struggle to obtain the credits they need for graduations. The 12th Grade Team works with seniors who are about to graduate and ensures that ELLs, especially new arrivals, are given every opportunity to graduate on time. This requires that students and parents work with our College Advisor and Guidance Counselors to ensure that they are meeting both the local and state requirements. Our theme for the upcoming 2017-2018 school year is again College and Career Readiness with a special focus on Common Core Learning Standards. New Visions is partnering with us with a focus on 9th and 10th graders for College and Career Readiness. Our College Advisor (Ian Pelton) assists students and parents in completing FAFSA (federal grant aid) for college. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 99 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Matthew Mazzaroppi, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 100  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MACS School DBN: 09X297 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) Matthew Mazzaroppi Principal Hoek Choi Assistant Principal Danielle Patillo Parent Coordinator Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Maria Rodriguez Parent John Gowan/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Norma Cruz/Science Teacher/Subject Area Roberta Kang N/A Coach Coach Christopher O'mara School Counselor Juan Mendez Samuel Rodriguez N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member New Visions Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 N/A 06/22/17 06/22/17 06/22/17 N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 101  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X297 School Name: MorrisAcademy for Collaborative S Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No ENL Teacher Yes Yes Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. To assess the language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication, pertinent information is culled from Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey, ATS reports, Student Emergency Contact cards, and informal surveys conducted by both ENL and content teachers in class. When new students are admitted to the school, parents complete the Home Language Identification Survey, a copy is kept on file and parent responses are logged to identify which languages parents of all students (ELL and non-ELL) prefer to receive written and oral communication. If necessary, additional ATS reports are generated to gather data on Preferred Language. Finally, Student Emergency Contact cards are collected from all students at the beginning of the school year if there is question as to parent's home language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 102  In order for students and their families to feel welcome to the school and ENL community, ENL teachers may conduct informal surveys with students in Stand Alone or Integrated ENL courses to determine the communication preferences of families. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic French Fulani Hausa Korean Mandinka (Mandingo) English Spanish Soninke Twi Vietnamese 4 8 6 6 1 1 0 362 287 3 1 1 0.59 1.18 0.88 0.88 0.15 0.15 0 53.24 42.21 0.44 0.15 0.15 4 7 6 6 1 1 1 357 291 3 1 1 .59 1.03 0.88 0.88 0.15 0.15 0.15 52.58 42.86 0.44 0.15 0.15 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 103  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Annual Student Handbook September Peer Group Connection Newsletter September Back to School Night Announcement September Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements October After-School Program Offerings October PSAT Testing Date Announcement October New York State Regents Testing Reminder - January Regents December Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation for documents will be completed using the following procedures: 1. The document will be written in English. 2. If available, bilingual translators on staff will translate the document into the Preferred Languages of parents. Currently at MACS, translators are available on site for Spanish (Jordan Chamoff) and French (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman). 3. If no translator is available for a Preferred Language, the LAC (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) will contact the NYCDOE Translation and Interpretation Unit in advance of mailing date to request a translation in the Preferred Language. 4. The LAC (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman), will provide the translated version of the document to the Parent Coordinator (Danielle Patillo) to be mailed to parents. 5. In addition to a written document, the message will be sent in English and the Preferred Language for written communication via text message using the messaging service Kinvolved. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 104  New York State Regents Invitation - January Regents New York State Regents Testing Reminder - June Regents New York State Regents Invitation - June Regents January May June Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night September interpretation service(s)? Interpretation in parents' Preferred Languages for all meetings will be arranged using the following procedures: 1. The LAC (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) will compile a list of parents' Preferred Languages for oral communication. 2. Based on the structure and location of the meetings, bilingual interpreters available on staff will be assigned to parents in attendance requiring interpreters. Currently at MACS, interpreters are available on staff for Spanish (Jordan Chamoff, Altagracia Dominguez, Christian Paulino) and French (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman, Andrea Gordon). 3. If no interpreter is available for oral communication in a Preferred Language, the LAC (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) will contact NYCDOE vendor The Big Word for in-person interpretation in advance of the meetings. If an interpreter is not available for in-person interpretation, then staff will utilize Language Line between the hours of 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. 4. In the event of being unable to secure an interpreter in the Preferred 2018-19 SCEP-FL 105  Parent-Teacher Conferences - Fall Semester APTT Meetings Fall Roundtables Parent Teacher Conferences - Spring Semester APTT Meetings Community School Forum Honors Night ELL Parent Brunch Spring Roundtables Annual IEP Meetings Annual ELL Parent Meetings November November February March March May May June June ongoing ongoing Language, MACS will always provide a written document highlighting key points of the meeting in the Preferred Language for written communication. These documents will follow the same procedure as outlined above for translating written documents. The LAC (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) will attempt to secure oral interpretation for a later date and schedule a follow-up meeting with the parent. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. Same as above. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In order to reach limited-English-proficient families in the event of a school emergency, MACS will utilize the text messaging service Kinvolved. Messages are automatically translated through Kinvolved into the preferred written language of the parent if available. In order to ensure clear communication with all limited-English-proficient families LAC (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) will arrange for a written letter translated into parents' preferred written language following the emergency in addition to follow-up phone calls utilizing the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 106  To ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, the LAC (Michelle Demeroukas-Fetterman) will review "the procedures for ensuring that Limited English Speaking parents are provided with a meaningful opportunity to participate and have access to programs and services critical to their child's education" during whole staff Professional Development. The LAC will describe the procedures for identifying parents' Preferred Languages for written and oral communication. The staff will review current statistics of Preferred Languages at MACS so that staff is aware of the need for translation and interpretation when communicating with students' families. Staff will be provided with lists of students whose families Preferred Languages are not English. The LAC will explain the procedure for acquiring translation and interpretation services should they need to communicate with parents regarding their. Staff members will be trained on how to use Language Line. If staff members require further services, they will be told to contact the LAC well in advance so that the translation or interpretation requests can be made to the Translation and Interpretation Unit. In order to meet compliance, MACS will use a variety of resources including: bilingual personnel on staff, the Translation and Interpretation Unit, Language Line, The Big Word, and other bilingual materials. There are many bilingual staff members (English-Spanish, English-French) at MACS who are available to provide translation and interpretation services. If there are languages that MACS cannot cover, then the appropriate services will be requested by the LAC through the Translation and Interpretation Unit. In addition to these services, MACS uses a variety of textual and visual materials in the covered languages to help make all families at MACS feel welcome no matter what their home or preferred language may be. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) In order to notify families of the translation and interpretation services guaranteed by Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663, several forms of notification will be used. Several Welcome Posters are displayed through the school building to demonstrate the linguistic inclusiveness of our school. The Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access will be printed and distributed to families during formal face-to-face meetings throughout the school year, such as Back to School Night or during Parent-Teacher Conferences. The Language ID Guide will be placed at both the security desk and main office of the school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? A parent survey designed to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services will be distributed to parents who communicate in a language other than English during Parent-Teacher Conferences in the fall and spring. Parents who are not given a copy of the survey during these face-to-face meetings will receive a copy that has been sent home with the student. The parent survey will be provided in both the home language and English to ensure total understanding of the questions. Responses will be translated either in-house or via the Translation and Interpretation Unit. These data will be organized and analyzed with key staff members as well as administration in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 107  order to effectively implement any necessary changes and improvements to assure that we are providing the highest quality and most availability of services as possible. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 108 
