2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X307 School Name: LUISA PIÑEIRO FUENTES SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND DISCOVERY Principal: YOLANDA VALEZ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: PS 307 321000010307 K to 5 th Grade 124 Eames Place, Bronx, NY 10468 718-601-2632 School Number (DBN): 10X307 718-796-7490 Phone Number: Marcy Schickler Fax: mschick@schools.nycv.gov School Contact Person: Yolanda Valez Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Betsy Diaz Murphy Doris Avila Marcy Schickler LucianoLeon Not Applicable N/A Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information MaribelHulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY mHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  BFSC FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 608-0230 Phone Number: 718-326-8140 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yolanda Valez Betsy Diaz Murphy Doris Avila MagdaBermudez LucianoLeon NA NA Sheila McChesney Danielle Gentile *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Teacher/Member Teacher/Member 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Marcy Schickler Guadalupe Robles EmelyMata Kimberly Varela BriandaLakeram Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Teacher/Member, Chair Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: SCEP Overview Mission Statement (revised 2018): The mission of PS 307 is to provide a safe and secure student centered environment that will promote the core belief that all students can grow and develop the skills necessary to become life long readers, writers, speakers, listeners, critical thinkers and problem solvers to attain their individual goals as lifelong learners. In order to establish trusting relationships as collaborative units we will engage parents, faculty and staff so that all students are prepared for success in their future endeavors. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Special Initiatives :  Continue with school wide monthly Social Emotional Learning Read-Alouds with extended activities from the Morningside 4R's.  PBIS team with lead will continue to participate in social and emotional training to support with this initiative.  PBIS team will lead SEL monthly assemblies.  Continue with LCI partnerships to support our SEL initiatives to improve our structures.  Expand on our SEL initiatives by adopting the Leader In Me practices to continue to engage all stakeholders in a whole school transformation process by engaging students in learning leadership and life skills to inculcate a belief system of student leadership.  Expand on School wide Read-Alouds by including multicultural books to continue to teach tolerance and embrace cultural diversity as part of our PBIS.  Continue to celebrate students' time spent reading on mYon.  Continue to work with student government (grades 3-5) giving them more opportunities for input and having a voice in some school decision making to improve school wide PBIS initiatives.  Expand on our collaboration with Box Out Bullying in school assemblies and school practices.  Continue with Community Service Initiatives with various organizations such as Local Church Food Pantry, March of Dimes, Juvenile Diabetes Research Fund, St. Jude, American Cancer Society, Bronx Veteran’s Hospital and Pearson’s Jumpstart Read for the Record.  Continue with annual Theatrical Musical Performance with a SEL theme.  Continue our partnership with The Town Hall with the support from Fernando Cabrera given that we afforded with the CASA Grant to provide all students with art, dance, music or theater experiences.  Continue to develop a Media team to attend external technology trainings to contribute to the staff''s professional learning.  Enhance the use of technology in the classrooms by increasing the number of ipads in the lower grades, and upgrading the laptops in the 2-5th grade classrooms with the grants awarded by Ruben Diaz (40,000), Jeffrey Dinowitz (125,000) and Fernando Cabrera (40,000)  Continue to use technology enhanced systems to compliment instruction such as Lexia, mYon, I-Ready ELA & Math, IXL Science, Eureka Digital, and Go Math Think Central)  All students are included in all special school initiatives including SWD and ENL students. Collaborations :  Our school community has a strong collaboration with Councilman Cabrera and his staff. Our students know the Councilman and consider him an integral part of our school community.  Continued collaboration with The Town Hall through the CASA Grant awarded by Councilman Cabrera. The Town Hall will allow us to provide students in grades K-5 with an arts experience, parent engagement art 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  activities and extracurricular for 4th -5th grade students to participate in a musical theater after school program.  Continue collaboration with the New Victory Theater and their Spark program with the third grade which will expand to our 4th grade students and teachers and will provide Art professional development for the teachers in 3rd, 4th and including 5th for 2018-19 school year.  Collaborations with various organizations (Local Church Food Pantry, March of Dimes, Juvenile Diabetes Research Fund, St. Jude, Smile Train, American Cancer Society, NYFD, Bronx Veteran’s Hospital, Red Cross, and Pearson’s Jumpstart Read for the Record) as an avenue to teach our students a sense of responsibility to give back to those in need.  Collaboration with Lehman College to host student teachers in our school to support in teacher development.  Collaboration with the Westchester Reading Council (a local reading council affiliated with the New York State Reading Association and charted by the International Literacy Association) which offers literacy professional development to our staff. Some staff members serve as members of the WRC Executive Board.  Continue to strengthen the partnership with Box Out Bullying.  Continue our collaboration with Public Allies for school wide literacy celebration of Dr. Seuss' Birthday and "Read Across America" Day (307 day).  Continue collaborations with various health organizations to provide parent involvement activities.  Collaboration with the New York City Department of Mental Health to provide mental health support services. Parent Involvement : Support on having an Active & functioning SLT & PTA “Packed” audiences at culminating grade dance art performances Schedule Annual School-wide student led Science Fair Schedule Student Led Parent Conferences  Continue to involve fathers to be part of the Community Street Watch Schedule a series of Family as Art Partners (FAAP) Saturday Institutes   Continue to grow the number of parent volunteers to be involved in school activties.   Work with the PTA to support student attendance incentives    Continue to have School-wide School Spirit Days   Work with PTA to have success with Fundraisers  Parent Workshops - both instructional and health related  Parent support on Instructional Trips  Monthly Parent Calendar  Book basket raffle for completion of Parent Learning Environment Survey  Highly successful bi-annual Scholastic Book Fairs (November & March)  Annual “Aiming High Perfect Attendance” parent engagement events for students and their families   Parent Newsletter  Establishment of school-based website and increased number of parent email address to improve Successful "Fathers Bring Your Child" to school event in the fall. communication with families.  Continue to improve communication via Parent Handbook  Support Student Clubs – Anti-bullying, Journalism, student newsletter. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Unique/Important Characteristics :  PS 307, Luisa Piñeiro Fuentes School of Science and Discovery, is a small K-5 grade school with 385 students and a staff of 60 that is housed in a non-DOE building site. We have 15 classes which consists of 2 kindergarten (one ICT), 3 first grade (one K/1 bridge), 2 second grade (one ICT), 2 third grade, 2 fourth grade (one ICT) and 2 fifth grade classes (one ICT). There is also one 1st/2nd grade special ed self-contained class and one 3rd grade special ed self-contained class. Of the 385 students, 173 are ENL students and 81 are SWD students. We have a nurturing, caring staff that goes above and beyond for all of our students including those 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  that are ENLs and SWDs. As a science school, science content is taught by two literacy/science specialty teachers three ENL teachers and the Arts is enriched through various grants. We are in our second year of Algebra For All and we piloted Computer For All this school year and now have a C4A lead teacher. Councilman Cabrera has awarded PS 307 with a CASA Grant in the amount of 20,000 to continue the collaboration with the Town Hall. We were also awarded a grant from the New Victory Theater in 2016-17 that expanded to 4th grade, for 3rd and 4th grade students to be part of their Spark Program. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year.  According to the trending ELA data report from 2013-2017, indicates that the most growth made was during 2015 to 2016, the percentage of Level 3 students went from 26% to 34% and Level 4 from .06 % to 3.0 %, the number of Level 1 students went down from 44.8 % to 32.7 %.  Overall 66% of our students are reading at or above their current end-of-year grade level as evidenced by their end of year Teacher's College Running Records. School Strengths and Accomplishments :  Nurturing supportive staff who truly care and know our students. Teachers have “adopted and bonded” with certain students across the grades and can be relied upon to reconnect with these students when they have specific needs. School based Literacy and Math Coaches Initiate Multicultural Read Aloud celebrations   ULIT coach for grades K-2  Building leadership among staff and students  Continue to align literacy, math and science curriculum to Next Generation Standards   Emphasis of reading and writing across all content areas. Improving Student Government initiatives and practices   Maintain a 95% or better student attendance  Public celebrations of students with perfect attendance and awarding classes  Continue practices with Inquiry based Teacher Teams     Maintain a functioning BRT and Safety Committee   After school and/or Saturday Academies for targeted students in grades 2-5  100% response rate to the NYC Parent Learning Environment Survey for the 2017- 2018 school year  Revive Physical education initiative and train teachers in Move to Improve to fulfill PE hours. School-Wide Service Initiative and collaboration with a wide spectrum of organizations Successful bi-annual Scholastic Book Fairs Implementation of the Morningside Center Social Emotional curriculum in grades K- 5th Increased participation of fathers at Parent Engagement Events Key Areas of Focus for 2018-2019:  Data driven instruction to meet the needs of all learners  How to effectively address the needs of the subgroups to improve performance  To develop a deeper understanding of problem solving, in order to become independent multi-step problem solvers who persevere to solve problems  Establish Number Talk routines 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X307 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 385 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 22 22 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 36 6 15 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 85.0% % Attendance Rate 84.4% % Reduced Lunch 38.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 87.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.54 0% 17% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 28.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 72% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 38 36 15 94.1% 1.3% 20.5% 6.0% 5.5% 0.0% 2 0% 6.2 25.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A YSH NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Progress monitoring assessment data indicated throughout the 2017-18 school year the percentage of ENL and SWD students in K through second grade performing on/above grade level were significantly higher than the students in grades 3 through 5. It is believed that is attributed to the emphasis on reading performance in the lower grades. Therefore teachers in grades 3 through 5 must monitor the reading more in depth in order for students to succeed in reading across all content area including but not limited to understanding complex vocabulary, content vocabulary and supporting language development. We need to also improve the practices when it comes to differentiation and or Specially Designed Instruction. The June 2018 needs assessment teacher feedback indicates that Mathematics should be supported by cross curricular activities across the content areas. They also felt that although we have made strides in content based Literacy lessons more effort is needed to focus on planning from assessment data and providing students with more effective feedback in order to build independence. Based on data analysis of the student work from the 2018 NYS Exams, we gathered a great deal information about where the students' short comings were. It helped focus the instruction, identified what to teach, with emphasis on language and writing to answer the question and supporting with specific details so that students have some skills based 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  knowledge when they take the 2018 NYS Exams. We will identify specific skills and strategies based on the 2018 NYS Exams, once data is analyzed. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will implement instructional practices that foster a learning environment that is responsive to students' varied experiences and that is tailored to the strengths and needs of all students that will result in an increase of 10% in student achievement in ELA as measured by Teacher's College Reading Assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Establish benchmark dates to provide school wide opportunities for teachers to review and reflect on the progress of students. All teachers Oct. 2018 Administration, Literacy Coach, All students selected for progress monitoring will be serviced through one or more of the following; in-class small group instruction, AIS, After school intervention, technology, ESL services. Focusing on oral language development with ENL students aside from what they need. Part of the school's commitment with DBI there will be one teacher on a grade that will provide intervention to one low performing student. They will use researched progress monitoring measure and follow the DBI protocol with fidelity. The teachers will also be part of a team monthly to discuss intervention periods, how to support students who don't make gain, etc. The school participation in Reading Rescue is expected to have five teachers who will participate intense professional development in the Fall to begin servicing one student for thirty minutes everyday in cycles. They will use the learning tools and progress measuring tools and follow the Reading Rescue protocols with fidelity. All K-5 students Selected teachers Teachers Jan. 2019 June 2019 ULIT Coach October 2018 - May 2019 Administration, Math Consultant, Math Coach, Consultant October 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Literacy Coach, ULIT coach October 2018 - June 2019 Administration,Reading Rescue liaison, Literacy Coach Teachers will be working in teams with the Assistant Principal as part of the Advanced Literacy they will participate in a book study group. They will be contributing to the professional development of the colleagues to help support teachers in understanding how ENL students learn and how to sharpen our practices. All Teachers November 2018 - January 2019 Administration, Advanced Literacy Team All teachers will participate in professional targeted in supporting all learners with an emphasis on teaching and learning of ENL and SWD students and students who have not made progress in the previous grade such as UDL, SDI, etc. All teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Literacy Coach, ULIT Coach All teachers in grades 2 to 5 will adapt a problem solving protocol for Mathematics that aligns with the Teacher's College protocol for reading comprehension. Teachers in grades 2-5 September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, Math coach, Literacy Coach and Educational consultant 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September to October 2018, Administration, Coaches, ULIT Coach, Teachers and Parent Coordinator will share with families the understanding of New Generation Standards, Instructional Focus, Rigorous instruction and more so as partners we can support our students, Instructional workshops to support their child's learning for all content areas and Portfolio celebrations, etc. From September to June 2019, the school will schedule Parent Engagement activities that will include introduction to New Generation standards, Reading and Writing strategies, Test Sophistication strategies, understanding content vocabulary, What fluency looks like cross content areas, Advanced Literacy and oral language development. We will schedule Literacy Nights such as portfolio shares, effective "Read Aloud," reading responses, reading conversations, etc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Teachers, Literacy Coach, ULIT coach, Data Specialist, AIS/RtI providers, Administration, ESL Teachers, and Content Specialty teachers and RSE-TASC support personnel. Instructional Resources: TCRWP curriculum, I-Ready online program, MYON, DBI, Reading Rescue, New Generation Learning Standards. Schedule Adjustments : Grade level common planning preps Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  For the 2018-2019 school year, students will be progress monitored utilizing BOY (Sept-Oct.2018), MOY (January-February 2019) and EOY (March-June 2019) with a focus on targeted students selected for progress monitoring. The expectation is that by February 2019, there will be a 5% increase from BOY to MOY in order to reach the 10% by EOY. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP Assessment Pro is used to monitor the reading progress of students in grades K through 5th grade, BOY, MOY and EOY in school year. The Reading running records and writing data will be reviewed to set up groups and provide targeted instruction based on the specific needs of students. During the teacher teams the inquiry work will be about looking at student data identifying the POP and finding ways to address the students" needs. In addition the progress monitoring measures of DBI and Reading Rescue will engage in these practices as well during the monthly sessions and discuss the data in depth. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to the LCI data (Spring 2018) indicates that our strengths are talking to kids about what they can do to improve their learning and speaking up when they need help. Although the data reflects that 69 % of students get spoken to about setting goals all the time or sometimes, this an area we wish to continue to foster in our students through the Leader in Me. The data indicates that an area of need is Teachers having discussions with students about things they are already good at. and building from there. Upon doing intensive LCI focus groups ranging from K-5, the staff is moving towards reviewing current and past procedures and protocols. The school community will begin to acclimate ourselves with the Leader In Me, to ensure that we have buy-in across all stakeholders. We will continue to utilize aspects of the Morningside Curriculum to align with the Leader in Me philosophy in building student empowerment. Based on reflection of student's responses and feedback we want to ensure to foster a safe, supportive environment where students feel validated, are heard and their viewpoint valued as part of the school community. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  The data clearly outlined that as our school needs to work on further developing efficient use of our Social Emotional curriculum. The two points that came across from looking at the data was students could benefit from student choice and a structured platform for sharing their work and or knowledge. In order to support SEL goals and objectives the Lighthouse committee in collaboration with Administration will continue to create learning lab-sites and opportunities for new teachers to observe good SEL Morningside lessons and practices. Based on the needs assessment most teachers felt that the Morning meeting initiative was a positive experience because it allowed for community building, for students to engage in discussions about feelings to share and a good way to start out the day. However, some teachers expressed a need for additional resources and a need to delve deeper for various SEL topics, more time to modify lessons, and SEL manipulatives. The Lighthouse committee and Administration will continue to collaborate with Box Out Bullying to continue our anti-bullying assemblies and to help students acquire better coping skills. As a result of this collaboration and their feedback about our school provided us with some insight from an outsider's perspective on next steps in terms of creating a positive school environment. The school will continue to have BOB facilitate with family involvement activities to support families with coping strategies as well. In addition to support the transition through the hallways the committee strategically placed landmarks throughout the school that were a huge success. Based on student feedback, students expressed that going from a two lunch period to a three period lunch period, provided a quiet venue for them to interact with their classmates, less chaos, they loved the recess and requested more choices for recess activities. However, recess activities were inconsistent due to the absences of personnel and inclement weather. Administration will continue to afford Lighthouse committee members with SEL professional development opportunities and continue to contribute to the professional learning of their colleagues and staff in order to continue to foster a positive school climate. Lighthouse committee members will continue to collaborate with New Victory theater to identify areas in which the arts can be embedded within the curriculum. The goal is that it will expand to 5th grade for the 2018-19 school year, this directly links to the feedback from our focus groups (2016-17) who wanted more movement and arts. Our goal with the Leader in Me is to design, develop and implement a leadership model for the school community, incorporating The 7 Habits. The 7 habits is a synthesis of universal, timeless principles of personal and interpersonal effectiveness, such as responsibility, vision, integrity, teamwork, collaboration and renewal, which are secular in nature and common to all people and cultures. It will provide a logical, sequential and balanced process to help the school successfully design the culture that reflects the school's vision of the positive school environment. This process will allow us to teach students the skills needed for academic success in any setting. These skills include critical thinking, goal setting, listening and speaking, self-directed learning, presentation-making and the ability to work in groups. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all staff will use social-emotional data to ensure that students receive the support they need to be successful socially, to develop social-emotional learning skills, and to remove barriers to learning which result in a decrease by 5 % in behavior incidences as measured by OORS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The teachers will continue to incorporate the Morningside Center for Teaching Social Responsibility curriculum to promote a positive school climate. K- 5th teachers September June 2019 Classroom teachers, Administration Administration will identify model SEL classrooms based on observations and walk-throughs to rate the effectiveness of the lessons and highlight best practices to encourage inter-visitations. 5th grade Classroom teachers The Lighthouse committee will create a new calendar to identify a character value for each month in order to foster a positive school wide environment, promote diversity and tolerance. Kindergarten - 5th grade Teachers and staff, Lighthouse keepers October 2018 - April 2019 Classroom teachers, administration and August 2018 - November 2018 Classroom teachers, Administration The school will continue to implement school wide School Spirit Days such as but not limited to Pajama Day, Multicultural Day, Characters of a story day etc., to foster a positive school environment. All teachers and staff October 2018- May 2019 Administrators, Lighthouse team School wide recognition and celebration of students' achievements such as PBIS classes, Perfect attendance, meeting 25 Book Initiative goals, dining hall and common area rewards, etc. Bucket filler awards such as citizen of the month, math star, writing and reading star and science awards, etc. Lighthouse Team,classroom teachers, students October 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, coach, administration, PBIS team School wide initiative is to be in proper uniform everyday teachers will monitor daily uniform use, a point system will be use to acknowledge classes that are in full uniform and build pride in wearing the school colors. Year One of the Leader in Me, the goal is to create a culture which includes the implementation of the key paradigms and The Leader in Me practices to foster a safe and respective culture and create habits where students take on ownership for their learning and behaviors. To continue to build capacity by sending more staff members to De-escalation training. Identify a Crisis Intervention personnel as Teachers, Lighthouse Team, students and Administration Entire school staff October 2018 - June 2019 Lighthouse Team and Administration November 2018, January June 2019 and May 2019 Classroom teachers, coach, administration Guidance counselor/Crisis Intervention October 2018 to May 2019 Classroom teachers, coach, administration and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  an additional support staff member to help with de-escalation, to support and work alongside the guidance counselor. Continue to host "Meet and greet" with new students and families to support and welcome them to the school community to help everyone adjust. Students in K-5 meeting the goal attendance committee, PTA, Lighthouse team, and PC Oct. 2018 Classroom teachers, Jan. 2019 May 2019 administration, attendance committee, PTA, and PC. October 2018 3rd and 4th grade teachers, and New Victory teaching artists 3rd, 4th and 5th grade students Our collaboration with the New Victory Theater will expand to include fifth grade teachers. Third through fifth grade students will perform what they've learned from the New Victory artists. They will continue to work with on the SEL habits of the students via the residency. The Lighthouse committee will continue to work with student government throughout the year in order to implement various engaging activities throughout the school. We will also use student council as a sounding board in order to address various social and emotional issues affecting the school. Student council for gr. 3-5 Every month from October 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, coach, Lighthouse team and administration Guidance Counselor and Crisis Intervention personnel will provide professional learning for teachers on different strategies for de-escalation and how to provide nurturing and supportive environment. Guidance Counselor/Crisis Intervention Staff October 2018 - May 2019 Classroom Teachers, Administration Lighthouse Fridays will involve project based activities that will foster comradeship and socialization among students integrating the arts, social studies, social issues, etc. Lighthouse team will continue to share some ideas for the project activities. All students K-5 including SWD and ENLS September 2018 - June 2019 Classroom teachers, administration, Staff, Lighthouse Team Box Out Bullying personnel The Lighthouse committee and Administration will continue the collaboration with Box Out Bullying in teaching strategies to help with assemblies in teaching students to cope with their feelings, develop ways to communicate with others, deal with conflicts and how to reinforce good behaviors. We will continue to provide workshops conducted by school staff on Suicide Prevention, Internet Safety, PBIS and Anti-bullying (including Cyber bullying), fire safety will support the development of a common understanding of the importance of their contribution toward a safe school community that is conducive to learning. Professional learning will be provided via DOE Behavioral Specialist. All students K-5 including SWD and ENLS September 2018/February 2019/May 2019 All students K-5 including SWD and ENLS September 2018 to November 2018 Administration, Guidance Counselor, Teacher, DOE and BFSC personnel. A workshop on Child Abuse Prevention and Identification will foster parent awareness of the signs of child abuse in order to support the emotional well-being of their children. All students K-5 including SWD and ENLS November 2018-March 2019 CAAP Staff The Lighthouse team will engage in reviewing data from previous year's OORS report, teacher reports, and anecdotes to identify students and device behavior support plans to support Guidance Counselor, Crisis Intervention, teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Lighthouse team, Administration and school aides, parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  students who are in need of SEL interventions to reduce the number of Tier III incidences. RSE-TASC will provide support with professional learning for Staff members to align the expectations for consequences with the Chancellor's discipline code, celebration guidelines and protocols. Lighthouse team, Administration September 2018- November 2018 RSE-TASC behavior Specialists, Teachers, staff, Administration, Crisis Intervention team In order to foster community building, the Light house Team will initiate weekly "Town Hall" meetings, where students will engage in 4R's discussions, participate in culmination and celebration activities. Light house Team, students and Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Light house Team and Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. For the 2018-19 school year, BFSC staff will be supporting the school with the parent support group goal for the Tier III students with resources and agencies that will help families. For the 2018-19 school year, the school will host parent workshops via staff members as well as agencies to help parents understand mental health, as well as meeting the emotional needs of their children. Light house and home outreach personnel will work together to communicate with parents in order to problem solve issues with regards to students not being in uniform on a daily basis and find ways to support the families. The school will schedule parent workshops throughout the year to inform them of the Leader In Me program, familiarize them with the seven habits of highly effective people, implement the key paradigms and practices of The Leader in Me, and the goals of the program. The goal is to get parents to understand the genuine partnership that must exist in order to create a positive school environment and understand the need for positive behavior interventions and supports in order to provide all students what they need emotionally and socially. The Light house committee and Administration will continue the collaboration with Box Out Bullying in teaching strategies to help with getting families as partners in teaching students to cope with their feelings, develop ways to communicate with others, deal with conflicts and how to reinforce good behaviors. Overall, to help parents to be a strong positive influence on their child's social and emotional growth and find ways to communicate with their children about bullying. From November 2018 through March 2019, in collaboration with Communilife the school will continue to have Parent workshops on mental health issues in children to support parents in finding resources to support their child's mental health such as Communilife. Have a Parent support group for the parents of Tier III students on child development. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: All teachers, Counselor, Psychologists, social worker, School aides, related services providers, Morningside staff developers, LCI, New Victory Theater artists and Box Out Bullying. Instructional resources: SEL (PBIS) read alouds, Leader In Me Principal's Academy summer training, Steven Covey's Book: Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, LIM webinars, RSE-TASC Behavior Specialists. Schedule adjustments: Common preps, team meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title I TA Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Lighthouse committee and Administration during scheduled Monday Professional Learning days will meet with staff in January 2019 as a mid-year checkpoint to gather feedback information about concerns about implementation and any needs for change. Staff will engage in discourse to determine next steps if necessary. The Lighthouse committee will also work with school aides to provide them with the support needed for them to implement a behavioral management system in the dining hall. The Lighthouse committee will meet with the school aides periodically to review and revise procedures and protocols as necessary. Administration will provide feedback about the transparency in classroom practice based on data collected from observations and OORS data to determine if improved practices are having an impact on the number of school wide incidences. The Lighthouse committee will lead in surveying the SEL initiatives to identify the students that are at risk socially and emotionally and help them to boost their self-esteem and outlook. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School-based data collection on behavior referrals. OORS reporting system of school incidences. Teacher classroom observations Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards x (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the findings of the 2017-18 PPR Measures of Leadership Practice, the strengths identified as well-developed were 1.3 Allocation of resources in building teacher capacity and 3.4 High expectations. According to the findings of the 2016-17 PPR , an area of celebration for our school was 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadership. Specifically, it was evident that "Structures have been built for teachers to meet regularly and to engage in professional studies based on research. The PPR findings for 2017-18 identified that we should continue to build on teacher capacity and ensure that pedagogical practices across the classrooms support rigorous discussions reflected in student work products to demonstrate higher order thinking development for all learners and across all classrooms. During 2018-19 needs assessment teacher feedback included teacher participation in professional learning cycles on how ENL students learn, knowledge of reading strategies for ENL students, SWD students and struggling students. Based on the May/June 2018 Needs assessment teacher feedback included the following:   Instead of the three cycles the teacher requested we engage in two cycles of inquiry so that they have sufficient time to really delve deep into the practices to have time to actually have time to hone in on the needs with the goal on improving the practices. Integrate the social and emotional learning (SEL) such as 4Rs program practices across all content areas. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27   Planning & Collaboration not only with grade level colleagues but include times for vertical planning across grades as well.  Planning explicit instruction on inferential thinking through read alouds/think alouds, and shared reading.  Schedule Professional Learning cycles on data based driven instruction, teacher practice based on individual needs and observation feedback on topics such as looking at student work, case studies, and focused book clubs.  Allot time to Identify and analyze research based intervention resources best suited to address student needs to help in both small group instruction and AIS/RTI.  The teachers also expressed that the feedback as a result of the collegial walk-throughs, be specific on improving the practices. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will use formative assessment to inform what is taught and use highly interactive, asset-oriented and additive, intellectually engaging, authentic and relevant feedback that is focused on deep learning and student autonomy. This should result in 100% of teachers maintaining or increasing overall end of year Advance Rating in component 3D as measured on the Danielson classroom observations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will attend and turn-key BFSC workshops or other external professional learning on teaching ENL and SWD students, formative assessments, student engagement, etc. ENL and SWD students October 2018- May 2019 Administration In the summer of 2018 the ENL team attended an ENL intensive instructional institute facilitated. by WestEd in order to develop practice that ensures that all students experience academically rich, culturally sustaining and positive teaching and learning daily to improve their academic, language and literacy learning outcomes. A select group of teachers have been identified to attend 9 trainings for intensive data based interventions for the 2018-2019 school year. These staff members will participate in both external and internal professional learning to provide both guided and independent practice for students while eliciting frequent responses and providing student feedback to maximize instruction. The premise is to add more cohorts every year. For the 2018-2019 school year select teachers and educational assistants will participate in professional development in Reading Rescue, a one to one literacy intervention for struggling first grade students. This professional learning by Literacy Trust will focus on assessments, data driven instruction in primary literacy skills. Teachers and leaders will continue to participate in PLT's with an inquiry based approach by identifying a problem of practice based on quantitative and qualitative data, engage in collegial walk-throughs, looking at student work, and contribute to professional learning for colleagues on their team based on needs of the students and teachers, etc. All Students August 2018 Administration and ENL Team Select teachers and targeted students September 2018-May 2019 Administration and selected staff members September 2018-May 2019 Administration and selected staff members Select teachers, educational assistants and targeted first grade students All teachers October 2018- June 2019 Administration, Consultants, Coaches and Data Specialist Continue to plan and schedule professional development to increase teachers' expertise for collaborative inquiry planning, looking critically at student work and analyzing data for effective planning, targeted small group instruction, interventions, student interviews, All teachers August 2018-June 2019 Administration, coaches, consultants, mentors, TC Staff Developers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  differentiation and grouping of students such as UDL, Advanced Literacies and SEL etc. During the school year, teachers will continue to participate in Teacher's College Inquiry study groups, and external and internal Professional Development. The internal PD will include development of coherent instruction structures and strategies on how they use formative assessment to adjust everyday instruction during small group and whole group. Classroom teachers Sept. 2018- May 2019 Administration, coach, data specialist During the school year, Computer for All as well as STEAM related activities will be expanded to engage students with opportunities to utilize computer science, digital resources and problem solving approaches to learning. Students, C4A Lead teacher, teachers TC staff developers will continue to build teacher practice by focusing on small group instruction through intra-visitations, inter-school visitations, lab-sites, lesson studies and/or observation and classroom modeling. Classroom teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Administration, CFA lead teacher Administration, coaches, educational consultants, mentors, TC Staff Developers School based coaches will continue to support teachers through one on one planning meetings, common planning, observing teacher practice, modeling, side by side coaching, and or co-teaching. Classroom teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, TC Staff Developers, Coaches Students that do not demonstrate growth in their reading levels by June 2018, an action plan will be created for those students for the 2018-2019 school year with the support of teachers, coaches, and data specialist . The action plan can be but not limited to, AIS, DBI, Reading Rescue, targeted small group instruction, use of Teachers College support materials, etc. Targeted students, AIS teachers, teachers Science teacher team will engage in acclimating themselves to the Next Generation standards, and its implementing stage finding innovative ways to engage students in highly engaging activities and opportunities for highly engaging discourse. They will also contribute to their colleagues professional Learning by creating pathways to support one another to help students succeed. Science Specialty Teachers, teachers September 2018 - Administration, coaches, mentors, January- 2019 June 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 Administration, In order to leverage best practices in mathematics and literacy professional development will be offered to teachers showing them how to use data, planning, small group, conferring and other strategies through consultants, TC and personal to establish coherence across mathematics and literacy. Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, Consultants, Coaches, 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting in October through May 2019 , Teachers, parent coordinator and leaders will ensure Parent engagement activities that will include introduction to any New Generation Standards, New Literacy initiatives such as Reading Rescue, DBI, Test Sophistication strategies, Writing Workshop, Oral Language development, Fundations practices, Word games and activities at home, Reading fluency, comprehension, retell, Math fluency, math strategies, what it 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  looks like and what to do, etc. Through November 2018 through May 2019 an opportunity for students to share and celebrate their work with their families will be provided. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Teachers, Literacy Coach, SETSS Teachers, IEP teacher, Data Specialist, TC Staff Developers, AIS/RTI providers, Administration, ESL Teachers, Content Specialty teachers, Educational consultants, Reading Rescue and DBI. Instructional Resources : TC Reading and Writing Units of Study, grade level lab sites, on and off-site professional development, TC Treasure Chest, technology. Schedule Adjustments : Grade level common planning preps, adjusting schedules for grade level teachers to observe demonstration lessons in lab sites and time for debriefing, possible schedule changes to accommodate lab site professional development, substitute coverage for off-site professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-point benchmarks in February 2019 will assess progress toward meeting our goal as follows: Teacher team inquiry based work will be monitored via student progress once Problem of practice has been identified in each of the TT cycles and what strategies the teachers implement as a result of the data. During mid year post observation conferences administration and teachers will review the data to determine its impact on student performance. We will using the Advance rating system as a check point to evaluate teacher's progress as well as student performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teacher's College running records to determine student progress and performance. Teacher Teams will present their cycle projects at the end of each cycle. The presentations will describe the Problem of Practice, the action steps and the results of these actions. Peer feedback will be collected and analyzed to determine the effectiveness of the teams' work. For the 2018-19 school year, the teachers will provide written feedback using a rubric tool to rate the effectiveness of the presentations as a measuring tool of the teams. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to 2017-18 Advance data, indicates an 8% increase in 1a (Planning and Preparation) and 21 % increase in 1e (Designing Coherent Instruction) clearly reflecting the use of human resources such as coaches, consultants and TC staff developers to improve teacher practice. In 2016, our teacher team practices were identified as a strength, teachers were engaged in professional learning teams that have been focused on student data and ways to improve practice. In 2017-18, as we continue to build on those practices, in year two of teacher teams, teachers identified problem of practice, planned for different strategies, engaged in collegial walk-throughs and provided their colleagues with feedback. According to the external reviews such as 2017-18 PPR, school leaders must maximize all the efforts in building teacher capacity in the use of assessments for instruction, continue your professional guidance to enhance frequent assessment strategies across classrooms including checks for understanding, student self and peer assessments and targeted teacher feedback in every day lessons to strengthen impact on student achievement. Therefore identifying the next steps for the teacher team practices. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  According to the 2017-18 PPR feedback, school leaders will continue to build capacity and ensure that pedagogical practices across classrooms support rigorous discussions reflected in student work products that consistently reflect higher order thinking development for all learners and across classrooms. School leaders will continue to provide teachers opportunities to engage in reflective practices such as discussions about feedback, inquiry team projects, and internal instructional walks. The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. School leaders will continue to develop teachers professionally by providing them with more professional learning opportunities in order to facilitate teachers learning from each other and shared in through teacher team practices, through Monday PDs, intra and inter-visitations, study groups, common planning, and TC staff development days. School leaders will continue to build teacher capacity by drawing on teacher's expertise to drive school initiatives such as SEL with the support of a DOE Behavior Specialist. The PBIS team will be known as the LIght house keepers who will align school wide protocols with DOE Discipline code to establish clear school protocols with all stakeholders in order to create and safe and positive learning environment and minimize the level of incidences. This is a priority, although the 2017-18 Advance data indicates an increase in 2a (Creating an Environment of Respect & Rapport) and 2d (Classroom Management) reflects the impact of the SEL practices of the classroom. However, the level 4 and 5 incidents still remain a concern reflecting that our practices need to extend more globally and that we ensure that school practices are coherent across areas of the school and all stakeholders are vested. School leaders will support teachers and provide professional development on the hallmarks of Advanced literacy practices and the implications for instructional shifts. To strategically plan for coherent teacher practice across the grades in order to ensure a shift in daily instruction that focuses more on building students' advanced literacy skills while teaching content. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, School leaders will use evidence based system (Advance) to monitor school wide processes designed to increase student achievement such as PLTs, Advanced Literacies and SEL that will result in a 10 % increase in student progress as measured by the NYSESLAT. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders will engage in periodic discussions about observations to identify trends across classrooms, grades, and content area, to assess and identify needs to plan PD opportunities. School leaders and teachers will participate in inquiry teacher teams to examine the student data to identify a problem of practice and develop high level strategies that will address students' needs including the ENL and SWD students. School leaders will participate in a minimum of two work sessions with the district TDEC to develop and write well-crafted feedback that informs teachers of their specific next steps. They will continue to build upon the successful practice of norming their classroom observations by collaboratively observing and rating at least 1/2 of all teacher observations. School leaders will work and data specialist to develop a framework for professional learning teams. This framework will include analysis of student data, Teacher inquiry cycles and teacher walk-throughs and feedback. The PLT framework will be reviewed mid-year to evaluate its effectiveness and impact on student performance and next steps. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration Administration, Leadership Consultant and Data Specialist Leadership Team, Administration, TDEC Administration, teachers and students October 2018 - May 2019 Oct. 2018 - June 2019 Administration, TDEC November Administration, TDEC 2018 - March 2019 Administration Oct. 2018 - May 2019 Administration School leaders will conduct a teacher survey at the end of the school year to gather insight regarding the impact of teacher observation feedback on their practice as a needs assessment for the 2019-20 school year. Administration and Leadership (cabinet) team May 2019 Administration Professional Learning Teams will continue to grow with more opportunities for teachers to learn from each other through focused intra- and inter-visitations. There will be a de-brief with the grade level or subject area instructional team to discuss observations and next steps. Administration and teachers Oct. 2018 to June 2019 School leaders will provide the time and space for teachers to work together to establish a common set of instructional practices - "The Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy" - in order to establish a Administration, teachers Oct. 2018- June 2019 Administration, instructional coaches, mentors, all other support personnel Administration, instructional coaches, data specialist, teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  shared language for discussing instruction and provide a clear structure for teacher observations. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. From September 2018 through June 2019, Administration, Coaches, Teachers and Parent Coordinator will share with families updates about the goals of the Teacher Inquiry teams and Advanced Literacy Hallmarks to inform them of the ways it will drive teacher practice in order to support student achievement. Administration will work with instructional coaches and teachers to inform parents and other members of the school community about the Hallmarks of Advanced Literacy in order to promote an understanding of the characteristics of effective literacy instruction for all students. During SLT meetings information about the work the teachers and Administration will be engaged in through SEL, the Teacher Team protocol and Advanced Literacy practices will be shared with parents on the SLT including the reasons for this work. The expectation being that SLT parent members will disseminate the information with the larger parent community via parent meetings. We will include information about the Teacher Teams and Advanced Literacy in the bi-monthly Parent Newsletter as well. We will also share briefly during Back to School Night. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources - classroom and out-of-classroom personnel, instructional coaches, mentors, TC staff developers, ESL Teachers, IEP teachers, AIS/RTI teachers, consultants, administration, substitute teachers Instructional Resources - TC units of study, classroom libraries, GO Math workbooks and materials, math manipulates, SMARTBoard professional development, STEM materials, Advanced Literacy training provided to APs at the district level. Teaching Advanced Literacy Skills: A Guide for Leaders in Linguistically Diverse Schools text by Nonie Lesaux. . Schedule Adjustments - common preps, clustering of prep periods to allow for TC demo lessons/debriefs, inter-visitations and intra-visitations. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the 2018-19 school year, the Leadership Team will engage teachers in professional learning walk-throughs as part of the PLT framework. A survey will be conducted mid-year and at the end of the year to determine the teachers' perception of the impact of school wide processes designed to increase student achievement such as PLTs, Advanced Literacies and SEL on teacher practice. In September 2018, Administration will review MOTP overall ratings to identify areas of concern in terms of the Advance components including teachers needing a TIP, teachers on the cusp of developing or ineffective in order to engage teachers in a conversation about clear goals and develop feedback strategies that will improve the teacher practice in those specific areas. The expectation is that all teachers will make significant progress along the continuum to more effective or highly effective. In January 2019, the Principal and Assistant Principal evaluators will conduct a mid-year review of the Advance data to assess where teachers are along the teacher effectiveness rubric in terms of teacher practice and discuss problems of practice and next steps based on teacher needs. At the end of each of the two PLT cycles (January and June 2019), Teacher Teams Key members of the Leadership Team will engage in conversations about the feedback in order to build capacity and empower teachers to take part in strong and effective instructional teams that will identify needs, create plans, and implement teacher led professional development opportunities which will include workshops (in house and by outside organizations), team meetings, inter-visitations, cycles of inquiry, and book study groups. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. * School created survey * Teacher observation reports * Professional Teacher Team presentations feedback rubric Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. X 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the last two years of a fully active PTA, Administration and parent coordinator will work diligently with the new PTA executive board to build leadership and help the parents learn how they can work with the school community on building the bridge between home and school. We will welcome the new team to the whole school community on Back to school night and have a newsletter introducing them to the school community. Administration will find ways to teach parent life long skills, building relationships with the community, computer skills, form relationships with the community businesses and other external resources and how they can support the schools in the community. During the Needs assessments and Review of Parent Involvement Policy with the SLT team, parents expressed a concern about why parents are not more involved and want to more involved in gathering parents in coffee talks during PTA meetings and putting out a survey on what would interest them in participating more often in school related events and instructional workshops that are often not well attended. According to the 2017-18 Learning Environment survey results reflect that 67% families say they have the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school, we need to improve that percentage and change parents mindset about volunteering. Title I Representative expressed the need for parents to be out during morning arrival to distribute fliers reminding parents about school parent events. SLT parents also expressed that if communication would be shared in a timely fashion would give parents more opportunities to be 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  present at school events. School leaders and parents will work at ways to improve communication systems to improve parent involvement. Historically our most attended parent involvement activities data, reflected that school wide events with a higher number of parents attending were those events that involved the students. Those events were “Dads Take Your Child to School,” Back To School Night, Arts Performances (especially for the lower grades), Algebra Family Night, the School Wide Science Fair and the Student Led Conferences and reading and writing celebrations. Parent coordinator and PTA will be looking at the data and discussing ways to make it better. Several other events that had a high number of parents attending were workshops where scheduling gave parents sufficient time to confirm their attendance and accommodate their time for them to attend. Also, those workshops were ones where Home Outreach Personnel had reached out to parents to inform them and/or remind them about the workshop. Parent Coordinator and PTA will work together to ensure information for all school events are disseminated in a timely fashion. The 2015-16 Parent feedback of the Learning Environment survey, the school will continue to improve the level of communication by increasing the utilization of the school website parents shared that information about parent events be shared on the website in a more timely fashion. That parents continue to be privy to the needs at the beginning of the school year. The school will also continue to host family workshops based on the needs of the families and students, but will include a multicultural event, earth day, enrichment classes, how to educate students at home to be problem solvers, thinkers, independent, parenting, cooking. The school will be having information sessions to let the know about The Leader In Me and discuss resources such as The seven habits for highly effective families by Steve R. Colby and Seven habits of Happy Kids, and websites such as Parent Tool Kit for the social and emotional learning. In order to work hand in hand with parents in creating the ideal school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders will implement a plan to ensure that all staff members understand how to create and sustain home-school partnerships in order to work together to support student achievement which will result in an increase in family participation by 10% as measured by the parent sign ins and parent feedback. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Welcome the new PTA executive board and Parent coordinator and school members through various facets of communication and communicate how they work together with members of the school for the betterment of the school. All Parents Continue to maintain the School Leadership Team composition of 50% parents and a Title 1 Committee to work together with a functioning team to work at improving school initiatives and or events. All Parents September 2018 to December 2018 Parent Coordinator, District Family Advocate, New PTA Executive Board Members September 2018– June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration, New PTA Executive Create a way to train parents to be volunteers in order to maintain and build a cadre of parent volunteers and recruit parents for participation and/or assistance in special functions. All Parents October Host a part of our annual FAAP and STEAM Saturday Institutes with families as way for parents and students to understand the importance of document what they've learned through visual representations and writing. All Parents /K-5 students 2018– June 2019 October 2018– June 2019 Board Members, SLT Co-Chair(s) Parent Coordinator, Administration, PTA, SLT members. Parent Coordinator, Administration, PTA, Teachers and CASA grant teacher residents. Parent Coordinator, Administration. Provide Parent Workshops to help them understand the accountability systems, such as but not limited to ESEA All Parents September 2018 – June 2019 /State accountability systems, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Reports, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report, New Generation Standards etc. Schedule additional quarterly parent meetings with flexible times, such as meeting in the morning or evening, to share information about the school's educational program and other Chancellor initiatives and encourage parents to provide suggestions. All Parents Conduct an Annual Title 1 Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic needs and what they can do to help. All Parents September 2018 – June 2019 September 2018 – June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration. Parent Coordinator, Administration. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Continue to host the culminating Arts performances for families to have opportunities for them to celebrate what their children have learned. All Parents December 2018 – May 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration. Continue to schedule school wide annual student led Science Fair for families, student led activities and Science workshops on the Next Generation Science Standards that appeal families to attend. Parent information sessions will be scheduled to inform families about important school wide initiatives such as Leader in Me, Reading Rescue, DBI, Eureka Math in 4th and 5th grades, and other changes. Teachers will continue to plan more Spring parent/student activities and communicate in a more timely fashion. Parent Coordinator, PTA and SLT Chair will monitor parent engagement participation to share at SLT monthly meetings. All Parents March 2019- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration. All Parents September 2018 – May 2019 Parent Coordinator, Administration. All Parents, PTA, SLT April – June 2018 Parent Coordinator, Administration, SLT members. Parent Coordinator, Administration, SLT members. According to the 2017-18 Learning environment survey, there is a need to have Special education meetings to inform parents about the different services available to the students to help them improve their academic performance such as Assistive technology, programs such as Wilson. SPIRE, etc. All parents, PTA and SLT October 2018 to - December 2018 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Councilman Cabrera's CASA Grant The new partnership with Marquis Studios The New Victory Theater grant Box Out Bullying CAAP Family Fair - Health First, Fire Dept. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human resources: Learning Leaders for parent involvement, the use of Home Outreach personnel to contact parents about Parent Teacher Conferences, School events, special programs, etc., Councilman Cabrera, BFSC, District Parent Liaison, support of the School Leadership Team constituents, support of Parent Coordinator, P.T.A. and Title I committee members. Support from other organizations to provide information sessions, parent workshops, etc. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Instructional Resources: We will continue to purchase instructional materials to raffle at all Parent involvement events,Purchase technology materials that will support students at home such as Science Flix, Lexia for ENLs, IXL Math,support the instruction. Schedule adjustments: Review and update the school wide website with the support of the Assistant Principal to allow us to continue to improve communication and dissemination of information to families, such as family handbook, Monthly Parent Newsletters, homework, etc. Program all events after school, during the day, and on Saturday for all parent involvement activities. Provide childcare and translation where necessary during parent involvement activities. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. ● In January 2019, school leaders, parent coordinator and SLT members we will review all parent involvement participation in all school events such as grade K-5 Back to School Night, Grade Level Orientations, PTC, etc. ● By June 2019, we will see if we have met the expected 5% of parents in K through 5 grade attendance at school wide events, such as but not limited to Family Art Performances, Science Night, Family as Art Partners Institutes, Publishing Celebrations, Student Led Conferences, Attendance Recognition Celebrations, etc. ● By January 2019, review what meetings and workshops have been held as of then such as the Learning Environment Survey session, Special Education meetings, etc. ● In January 2019, review Parent Feedback forms to monitor their input after family workshops. ● In January 2019, review and reflect on the on the dissemination of home-school communication via Parent Newsletters, Principal to Family Letters, Parent Website, Parent Calendars, etc. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Event sign-in sheets, agendas, statistics of parents attendance. Monitoring of the Parent events on monthly basis. Parent Coordinators monthly reports Parent surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Targeted students are identified by teachers based on all school based literacy assessments Targeted students identified by teacher based on mathematics data from all school based assessments Targeted students identified by teacher based on data from all school based assessments Targeted students identified by teacher based on data from all school based assessments Tier II an Tier III students identified using a variety of screening methods and multiple data sources (i.e. teacher Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) RtItargeted instruction,Wilson, Small group, one-to-one During the school day &/or after school Small group, one-to-one During the school day &/or after school Small group Small group After School & Saturday Academies for 4 th graders During the school day &/or after school Small group/individual During the school day Lexia, myOn, SPIRE, Voyager, guided reading strategy and small groups, Data Based Inquiry, Reading Rescue Go Math Think Central, IXL Math, Big Brainz, Mathmats Re-teach one on one and/or small groups Teacher developed science program based on Kaplan testing strategies Teacher's College contentarea materials Guidance Counselor /CrisisIntervention Team will deliver primary interventionusing problem solving, defusing and de- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  recommendation, family outreach by parent coordinator, data from teacher reports/anecdotes, etc.) escalation techniques. The school will implement the following programs as a Tier 1 support: SELtechniques, character building, coping strategiesand anger managementskills and strategies. Counselor, PBISTeam, SIT Team, SocialWorker, Psychologist will provide additionalsupports as necessary. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 102 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  Academic Programs & educational support services  Basic/emergency supplies  The work of the liaison  Counseling services  Data collection to assess the needs/progress of STH  Parental involvement  Outreach efforts to identify the STH population and help them  Intervention programs access school Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● The New Teacher Induction Committee members consist of a constituency representation of our staff. The committee consists of the Literacy Coach and includes teachers of Special Ed, ESL and various grade levels to have representation of teacher expertise. ● Math and Literacy Coaches are assigned specifically Year 1 and Year II teachers and any new teachers to the school community to support them with planning, implementation of instruction, assessments, classroom management and any other needs of the specific teachers. This is achieved through demonstration lessons; debrief sessions, observation feedback and inter-visitations. ● Literacy and Math Consultants are also assigned to specific teachers to support them with assessment, planning and implementation of instruction through means of demonstrations, co-teaching, planning, discussions, etc. ● School based mentors who are strategically matched with new teachers to support them in planning, implementing curriculum, classroom environment, classroom management, assessments, analyzing data, and any other areas of need or support. The mentors have received mentoring training through the NTC Instructional Mentoring Initiative and School Leadership Series or are teacher leaders, coaches or senior teachers. ● Continuation of grade level literacy labs to support ongoing implementation of TC curriculum units of study with TC staff developers. ● Our collaboration with Lehman College who provides us with student teachers who need to fulfill their observation hours or practicum in our school building.  The process includes: identification of possible candidates for interview, then candidates’ interview with the NTI Committee to determine hiring status and if necessary a demonstration lesson is scheduled. ● Continuation of TC lab sites on each grade with demo lessons provided by TC staff developers and teacher colleagues. Demo lessons are followed by debriefing sessions. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● Extensive professional development opportunities both on site and off-site such as, but not limited to DOE Sponsored PDs, Learn Teaching Channel Webinars, Learn Videos, Teachers College Conference Days, Westchester Reading Council meetings, UFT Professional development meetings. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our goal is to ensure that teachers are constantly learning on site and/or off site. The school has a PD Committee whose members assist administration in focusing in on the content and curriculum needs of all staff members. To help ensure high quality PD, the school is collaborating with C. King Education and Teachers College for consultants in both literacy and mathematics. Administration is constantly researching for additional outside sources to support teachers based on school wide goals and/or classroom observations. As a result, teachers participate in professional development that is specific to school wide goals, classroom observations, content and curriculum needs. Professional development activities are ongoing and may include but are not limited to literacy and math curriculum planning, CCLS, RtI, assessments, DOK, Data Inquiry, differentiation, conferring, integration of technology, questioning, etc. Teachers also have opportunities to participate in webinars, video viewings, book clubs, discussion of professional articles, common planning sessions, lunch shares, etc. Teachers are continuously sent out to professional development offered by Teachers College, NYCDOE, Bronx Field Support Team, Reading Organizations and curriculum developers such as the Go Math Workshop Series and Algebra for All. Teams of teachers participate in professional development offered by organizations such as the Morningside 4 R's via teachers, Leader in Me, ESL, Related Services etc. to build capacity within the school and to a create a cadre of teacher experts who can then turn-key pertinent information which is needed to move teachers and administrators forward to meet the demands that ensure students perform successfully. The establishment of grade level literacy lab sites will offer greater opportunities for staff members to observe both TC staff developers and their colleagues implement units so as to build capacity within the building. Additionally, selected staff members will attend TC ongoing study group PD and then turn key to build capacity. Our staff is accustomed to always sharing best practices. Teacher Teams will collaboratively discuss and identify professional development needs of the team as a whole , to plan and schedule when the team members will facilitate professional development (in cycles), to discuss possible study groups the teams might engage in, to review and discuss student data and tailor professional learning cycles that will support the teacher practice with the focus on tailoring the instruction for all students. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. A MOSL committee comprised of teachers, UFT and Administration meet to discuss the current assessments, the validity of the data and decide on the assessments for the current school year. Teachers expressed concerns about streamlining and matching assessments to curriculum. The decision to go with TC will enable the school to do that streamlining and matching. Some members of the MOSL committee will attend professional development on assessments and then provide professional development and support to the rest of the staff. Teacher teams met with the Literacy Coach, Data Specialists, RtI liaisons, ESL teachers to score, to analyze data and to identify trends and instructional needs. This information was utilized to form targeted groups and identify resources to help students be academically successful . 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Federal 336,042. 16,979. 50,220. X X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8 Section 5A, 5C Section 5A. 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49 Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 72,101. 20,302. 0 2,515,564. Tax Levy (FSF) Local X X X X Section 5A Section 5B N/A Section 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, 6, 7, 8 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in our school. PS 307, Luisa Piñeiro Fuentes School of Science & Discovery, in compliance with The Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between our school and the families. Our school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Teacher Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of our school community. PS 307 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering effective and strong home-school partnerships to ensure that parents can successfully support and monitor their child’s progress; creating welcoming environments for families using community resources to support parents based on needs;   providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52   providing professional development opportunities for school staff to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community Parental Involvement and School Quality Our school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Native Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will facilitate in scheduling parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include but are not limited to understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum standards and assessment expectations; literacy, math, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency and performance levels, Progress Report, Quality Review Report,Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESEA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other Chancellor initiatives and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed;   2018-19 SCEP-FL 53   conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Meeting;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent-Teacher Association and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about overall curriculum and school activities;  providing regular written communication between the teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 307, Luisa Piñeiro Fuentes School of Science & Discovery, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s New Generation Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the ESSA Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:    conducting 3 parent-teacher conferences (one being conducted by the student) during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how the Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54   respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services, such as a translator, Language Access Line, etc., in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member (via our Parent Coordinator, the “Can We Talk’ form in the Main Office, through Parent Teacher Conferences, Family Orientations, Family Curriculum Meetings, Tuesday After School Parent Engagement, etc.); arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer through the Learning Leaders Program and participate in their child’s class through instructional trips and celebrations;   planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Tuesday After School Parent Engagement, Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Parent Workshops, Parent-Teacher Conferences, culminating Arts performances, Science Fair, Sports Night(s), Algebra for All, Family as Art Partners Saturday Workshop, etc. Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (Tuesday After School Parent Engagement and additional times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55   ensure that my child is feed breakfast at home or allow sufficient time to attend the school's breakfast program;  ensure, check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;   monitor and set limits to the amount of time my child watches television and movies, plays video games, and read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); their use of the telephone, computer and Internet;  promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading, writing, science, social studies and physical education and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become aware of and involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to  learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child   ensure that your child(ren) are wearing the appropriate school uniform and when required the appropriate uniform sweater III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully;       wear the appropriate school uniform and when required the appropriate school sweater;   give my parents ALL school notices, calendars, etc.; always try my best to learn 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Direct Instruction Expenditure #1: Rationale: Some of our older ENL students are at risk of becoming long-term ELLs. They already have five or six years as ELLs, and we worry about their prospects as they leave our small school for secondary schools. We find that these students’ lack of academic progress is related to their mindsets regarding school. Often times their social and emotional states interfere with their disposition to learn in the classroom. We believe that these students would be more responsive in the classroom to academic learning if they are provided small group instruction by a ENL teacher and role model whom they admire. This Teacher will work at developing the growth mindset in such students. Students will be reading and discussing (listening and speaking modalities) the content of Your Fantastic Elastic Brain and The Owner's Manual to Driving Your Adolescent Brain, including connecting these concepts to their experiences. Other concepts that will be address include attitude building, building cognitive capacity, and developing short and long-term goals. These ideas will be supported by the instructor through the activities presented in Turnaround Tools for the Teenage Brain and The Motivated Brain: Improving Student Attention, Engagement, and Perseverance in the Classroom. They will use their journals to write short-term and long-term goals, to monitor their goals, to reflect on the reading, and to keep track of their day-to-day experiences, challenges, and reactions. Subgroups and Grade Levels Served: Grades 4 & 5, Developing ELLs (at risk of becoming Long-Term ELLs as middle schoolers) There will be a ratio of 6 students to 1 teacher. Schedule and Duration: October 30 - June 2nd; Mondays and Fridays from 7:45-8:15 a.m. Language of Instruction: English Number and Types of Certified Teachers: (1) Classroom ENL teacher Types of Materials: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Journal Notebook per student Books: The Motivated Brain: Improving Student Attention, Engagement, and Perseverance in the Classroom by Gayle Gregory and Martha Kaufeldt Turnaround Tools for the Teenage Brain: Helping Underperforming Students Become Life-long Learners by Eric Jensen and Carole Snider Your Fantastic Elastic Brain, Stretch It by JoAnn Deak and Sarah Ackerley The Owner's Manual to Driving Your Adolescent Brain by JoAnn Deak, Terrence Deak, and Freya Harrison Direct Instruction Expenditure #2: Rationale: Our lower grades ELLs have our highest proportion of recent-arrival ELLs and ELLs struggling with oral fluency. These students will benefit from language-rich and context-rich storytelling in after-school and Saturday academies. This storytelling will integrate science and social studies concepts to increase students' conceptual knowledge. Topics may include butterfly and frog metamorphosis, ocean diversity and the food chain, and customs, cultures, and folklore from different countries around the world, including those of our ELLs (e.g. Ecuador, Vietnam, the Philippines, Spain, the Dominican Republic, and Yemen.) Storytelling will allow for our ELLs to acquire excellent English fluency in an interactive and engaging format. Through the storytelling, students simultaneously improve their literacy through repeated readings and differentiated literacy tasks related to the performances. At the same time, the integration of non-fiction content into storytelling will help build background and conceptual knowledge as well as vocabulary--two areas that need supplementation from the school-day, given the limited experiences of our ELLs. Subgroups and Grade Levels Served: These after-school and Saturday storytelling academies will serve the lowest performing immigrant students in grades K-3. Students are divided into target groups which mix proficiency levels so as to provide more language models for our newest ELLs. There will be no more than 10 students in a group. Schedule and Duration: Our Title III after-school program will run in three cycles throughout the year. Each cycle will last 8 weeks, servicing three small groups of students during each cycle. Each group will meet once per week for 1 hour on either Wednesdays, Thursdays, or Fridays from 3:00-4:00. Cycle 1: November 3 - December 23 Cycle 2: January 12 - March 10 Cycle 3: March 22 - May 19 Language of Instruction: English 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Number and Types of Certified Teachers: (3) ENL teachers Types of Materials: Sets of storybooks with accompanying audio CD (instructional material) Puppets (supplemental material) Felt characters (supplemental material) Felt boards (supplemental material) Character costumes (supplemental material) Butcher paper, paint, and brushes (supplemental material) Videos on science and social studies topics (instructional and supplemental material) Texts on science and social studies concepts (instructional and supplemental material) Direct Instruction Expenditure #3: Rationale: The majority of our upper-grades ELLs are struggling in the content areas of science and math. This year's fourth grade NYS science exam showed that many ELLs understood concepts but lacked the language to clearly express their understanding. In math, 9 out of 11 of our fourth grade ELLs scored a 1 on the NYS math exam in third grade (we do not yet have 2016-17 results.) For these ELLs, we will provide targeted content support through Saturday academies. Subgroups and Grade Levels Served: Our science-intensive academy will serve all 4th grade ELLs split into two groups. Tjhe ratio will be no more than 8 students to 1 teacher. Our math-intensive academy will serve those 4th and 5th grade ELLs who scored a 1 on the NYS math exam (currently 9 ELLs that will be in 5th grade; 10 ELLs in 4th grade). The ratio will be no more than 10 students to 1 teacher. Schedule and Duration: The science academy will run on the four Saturdays in May from 9am - 12pm The math academy will run on four Saturdays in March and April from 9am - 12pm Language of Instruction: English Number and Types of Certified Teachers: (3) ENL Teachers; 100% of the time (Our ENL teachers provide teach science and math) Types of Materials: Previous science and math exams with student exemplars at different levels of response (instructional material) Hands-on experiments and models (instructional and supplemental material) Key vocabulary printed on color copies (supplemental material) Props for interpreting vocabulary through acting (supplemental material) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: The staffing for these supplemental programs will include Ms. Maturen (ENL Coordinator), Ms. Nichols (ENL Teacher), Ms. Lier (ENL Classroom Teacher), Ms. Kerr (ENL Classroom Teacher), Ms. Boksner (ENL/Reading Recovery Teacher) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Families will be notified by flyers in English and Spanish. Those who do not respond to the flyer will be called and notified of the opportunities. All records of participation and attendance in the office by Diana Rivera, office assistant. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development #1: Rationale: Title III Program teachers want to improve their instruction to ELLs by collaborating with one another in a book club. We will gather ideas from our collaborative reading, clarify them during our book club meetings, put ideas into practice during our lessons, and then share our outcomes and provide one another feedback in subsequent sessions. It will also provide an opportunity for ENL teachers to share best practices with one another. Title III will fund multiple copies of two professional titles as well as per session hours. Teachers to Receive Training: Ms. Maturen (facilitator) Ms. Nichols (facilitator) Ms. Kerr Ms. Lier Ms. Boksner Schedule and Duration: Each book club will last five weeks for an hour per session. We will schedule two book clubs per year. Meetings will happen on Wednesdays from 2:45-3:45 alternating between Title III after-school sessions. Topics to Be Covered: Literacy and Content Learning for ELLs: Our first text will be Cultivating Knowledge, Building Language: Literacy Instruction for English Learners in Elementary School by Nonie Lesaux, Julie Russ Harris, and Nell Duke. The second text will be selected by the group. Name of Provider: Ms. Maturen, ENL Coordinator, and Ms. Nichols, ENL teacher, will facilitate these professional developments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Part C: Professional Development Professional Development #2: Rationale: We are all teachers of ELLs in our school. Therefore, we provide ENL professional development (PD) in our Monday professional development series at no cost to Title III. Allowing this time to establish common practices and coherent understanding across staff allows us to best service our ELLs at all times of the school-day. Staff to Provide Training: ENL Teachers turn-keying information from Educational Specialists, such as Teachers' College PDs and Bronx Borough Field Center PDs. Teachers to Receive Training: All teachers and staff ENL Teachers Schedule and Duration: School-wide ENL PD will occur quarterly during our school-wide Monday professional development sessions from 2:45-4:00. Co-planning will occur every other Monday from 3:15 - 4:00. Topics to be Covered: Topics will include best practices when teaching literacy and content areas to ELLs. The content will come from outside professional development session in the form of turn-keys and also from our book club learning and implementation in the classroom. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: Agendas and attendance forms are created for every PD. Records of all in-school professional development, including attendance, is maintained by our pupil secretary Yanira Castro. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Engagement Expenditure #1: Rationale: Parent of ELLs are frequently unaware of the many educational resources available to them and their children within the city and accessible by public transportation. Therefore, we will host trips for parents and children to museums and expositions around the city, helping parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities familiarize themselves with educational resources and transportation options to such institutions/events. Exposure and interaction with teachers at families at the cultural institutions allow students to develop background knowledge in multiple areas as well as terminology and vocabulary specific to each topic. Even though much of the interaction takes place in the native language, we are all acutely aware that native language proficiency and background knowledge in any language is directly related to students' acquisition of English. In many cases, the entrance to these institutions is free, as we are visiting during free days/hours. In some occasions there is a fee that will be paid by Title III. In addition, we will assist ENL parents in applying for the NYCID so that they can access many of these cultural institutions for free during the first year of their membership. We will be taking public transportation to the sites, so Title III will also pay for the cost of Metrocards. Schedule and Duration: Six Saturday/Sundays from 9:30 am to 1:30 pm during October to June. Destinations/Topics to be Covered (depending on availability): Metropolitan Museum of Art’s Opera--Family Circle Bronx Museum—Free Family Events New York Botanical Gardens—Grounds and Edible Garden Wave Hill—Grounds and Family Art Project New York Hall of Science MoMath (Museum of Mathematics) MOMA—Free Family Workshops American Museum of Natural History--Discovery Room Names of Providers: Ms. Maturen—ENL Teacher and Coordinator (Spanish/English bilingual) Ms. Nichols—ENL Teacher How Parents Will Be Notified of These Activities: Parents will be invited via Spanish/English bilingual letters that will be sent home detailing the destination, activities, time, and date. Contact information will be provided in case parents have questions/concerns. Connected to the home letter will be a response section where parents will confirm/decline each invitation. Reminder calls will be made the day prior to the event. Types of Materials: Metrocards NYCID Applications Pre-visit materials Parent Expenditure #2: Rationale: Apart from the fabulous parent workshops that we provide to immigrant parents in partnership with Ramapo for Children, a non-profit organization dedicated to improving outcomes for families, our ENL team gives workshops for parents throughout the school year. These topics include: best educational practices with children, free software for adults to learn English, and an information session regarding the NYSESLAT. For each workshop, one session will be held 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities during the day and another identical session will be held after school hours. These will be at no cost to Title III. For the workshop that encourages parents to get involved in their child's literacy development (developing speaking/listening skills from 0-3), we will purchase board books for parents to use during the workshop and take home with their young child/children. Also, all workshops always hold a raffle of educational materials for parents and children at the end--a practice which increases our parent participation. As part of the latter two workshops, we will purchase bilingual storybooks, Scholastic Storybook DVDs, and LeapFrog Letter Factory/Sound Factory DVDs as workshop raffle incentives. These will be the only costs paid by Title III. Schedule and Duration: (6) times from October – May. Each workshop will last approximately one hour. Topics to be Covered: 1. The Importance of Talking to and Listening to Your Young Child in Any Language! 2. Using DuoLingo—Free Software for Learning English 3. Getting Ready for the NYSESLAT Names of Providers: Ms. Maturen—ENL Teacher and Coordinator Ms. Ocasio—Parent Coordinator Ms. Nichols—ENL Teacher Ms. Boksner—ENL Teacher and Reading Recovery Teacher How Parents Will Be Notified of These Activities: Parents will be invited via Spanish/English bilingual letters sent home detailing the workshop content, date, and time. This letter will also be posted on the main entrance door. Parents can return the confirmation portion, and phone calls will be made to remind parents of the engagement. Ms. Maturen, the ENL Coordinator, is bilingual, so she designs all flyers in letter in both languages. She also provides all translation services during the events. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 7419.60  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum 1236.20 Professional development 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2473.20 Instructional supplies Parent Involvement 1236.20 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Luisa Pineiro School of Science and Disc Borough Bronx School Number 307 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Yolanda Valez Coach Sheila McChesney ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Michelle Maturen Teacher/Subject Area Elizabeth Nichols/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Marcy Schickler/EGCR Related-Service Provider Laura O'Connell/SETTS Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Debra Springsteen Coach Yvonne Rivera School Counselor Denny Matos Parent Yanira Castro Parent Coordinator Liza Ocasio Field Support Center Staff Member Maria Guerrero, Dep.Dir. for E Other (Name and Title) none C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 4 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 389 Total number of ELLs 159 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 40.87% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? As a Teachers' College school, P.S. 307 we are using Columbia University's Teachers' College assessments, which consist of running records as well as optional early literacy skill-based evaluations, to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs. We found that this is more accurately measuring our students' reading levels and matching them to appropriately leveled texts. Under TC, we will continue to use the optional components to assess those foundational skills typically mastered prior to reading (such as rhyme, sound manipulation, and sound-letter associations) for our kindergarten and first grade assessments. Data from previous such assessments show us that our ELLs typically perform lower than their proficient classmates on early 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  literacy preparedness, including phonological and phonemic awareness. In addition, we have found while there are many visual references in these early literacy assessments aimed at assisting the students, many of our ELLs are not familiar with the vocabulary for a given visual, causing them to struggle to answer the question. (For example, a student is shown a picture of a cat and asked to say what sound the word starts with. If the student does not know the English word for “cat” he will struggle to produce the first sound of the word.) Thus, we also assess their literacy levels in the native language using the DRA2 (if Spanish, as we do not have formal assessment kits in our minority languages.) Furthermore, 92% of our ELLs who took the ELA in 2017, performed at the 41-50 Citywide Percentile or below. 21% of our ELLs who took the ELA in 2017 reached a Commanding level that year or previously. To combat ELLs' areas of weakness, ENL instruction will be tailored to include intensive phonological and phonemic awareness. For example, in order to address weaknesses in sound/letter relationships, each time the group meets the ENL teacher will review the sounds the students struggled with through pictures, words, kinesthetic motions corresponding to the sound, and literature. To address phonemic awareness, we will build oral word letters by manipulating one sound, and develop concepts of rhyme and oral fluency through songs. Across the grades, those students identified as below the needs of the class majority in literacy will receive literacy intervention (RtI) at a minimum of three times per week from a highly-qualified early literacy specialist, in addition to their ENL minutes. This time allows for intensive, small group instruction on targeted skills identified as areas in need of further instruction through these early literacy assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school assesses the success of our programs for ELLs through many different channels. First, the school staff examine assessment data from sources such as running records, state assessments, writing baselines, the Gates-MacGinitie screener, conferencing, and informal observations to determine literacy growth periodically throughout the year. The data collected at the beginning of each year is compared to the data collected at the middle and the end of the year to measure ELL students’ overall academic movement throughout the year. If the ELLs have not made progress on the middle of the year assessments, the ENL teachers work with the administration and the classroom teacher to discuss the effectiveness of the current Tier I ENL and classroom programs and instructional methods, and make any changes necessary for the ELL students. For example, if an intermediate level ELL student is not showing sufficient progress in an all push-in program, the team may decide that the student would benefit from being pulled out for stand-alone ENL with the entering and emerging ELL students two times a week for small group instruction. This new setting would be evaluated for its effectiveness in assisting the student in making academic progress. In Math, ELLs tend to be our slowest group for growth. In general, the school is struggling and hasn't made significant gains in Math. Math is the point we're trying to focus our attention. In literacy, we're using TC to push our curriculum as ELLs and non ELLs have made gains in this area. ELL-SWD students tend to show the slowest growth on reading assessments. Finally, the NYSESLAT is used to measure the success of our programs for ELLs. When NYSESLAT scores are received, the ENL Team at P.S. 307 examines the data to ensure our programs are meeting the needs of our ELL students. If the programs are not meeting the students’ needs, areas of need are identified and alternative methods, groupings, and scheduling are discussed. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once baseline information has been collected, the classroom teachers, ELL teachers, and RtI team meet to discuss the data. We first examine the needs of the majority and see if our daily instruction adequately address their needs, and then 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  identify outliers to the majority. Then we decide on action-plans where outliers are grouped into similar skill needs. Classroom teachers brainstorm how to support these students during their day through guided reading, strategy lessons, routines/structures, partnerships, etc. Our ELL teachers examine the needs of their ELLs and how they will integrate these needs into their stand-alone and integrated periods. And our RtI team address the lowest outliers in groups based on common skills on consecutive grade bands. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] In general, we classify Tier I as our in classroom, day to day intervention; Tier II is classified as our small group intervention. Unfortunately, we lost our Reading Recovery teacher/specialist last school year, and we no longer have Tier III intervention. However, we are planning to implement Reading Rescue in the near future. Pedagogues at P.S. 307 look at the assessment data for our ELLs, as well as all other students, in order to plan instruction for our ELLs within the RTI framework. The staff looks at data from sources such as the NYSESLAT, the NYSITELL, the Spanish LAB, foundational literacy inventories (in English and Spanish for new arrivals), running records (in English and Spanish for new arrivals), state assessments and the Gates-MacGinitie. Collectively, these are used to determine Tier I whole-class needs and also to form Tier II groupings for our RtI intervention periods. These intervention periods take place during the reading and literacy centers period in each classroom, and intervention is provided by a high-quality early literacy specialist. During these periods students may be grouped across classrooms and/or grades if there are insufficient peers who need the same intervention. One example of such a grouping is in grades four and five where our newcomers were grouped together to receive support in vocabulary and decoding--two areas where these students were far below the levels of their peers, as determined by the Gates-McGinitie screener. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data gathered from both the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT provide us with an opportunity to recognize patterns across proficiency levels and grades. In kindergarten, we find that most of the NYSITELL-eligible students who have attended pre-kindergarten at P.S. 307 or in English-dominant UPK programs score at an advanced level. Those kindergarteners who are new arrivals to the country or who have not had a pre-kindergarten experience with P.S. 307 tend to score at a beginner or intermediate level. Regardless of proficiency level, under the revised NYSESLAT all Kindergarten ELLs tend to struggle more with the writing elements of the exam than the reading, listening and speaking portions. Kindergarten students tend to increase about one proficiency level from the NYSITELL at the beginning of their kindergarten year to the NYSESLAT during the spring of their kindergarten year. There are, of course, a few exceptions where the students’ proficiency level decreases from the NYSITELL to the NYSESLAT, primarily due to literacy struggles, as reading and writing are not assessed at Level I of the NYSITELL. In first grade and beyond, the ENL teachers work diligently to pinpoint the modalities where the ENL students struggled on the previous year’s NYSESLAT in order to address these areas of weakness in the students’ proficiency. In first grade, we find that across the proficiency levels in first grade, students all tend to struggle more with the reading than other portions. Perhaps this is due to the disparity between the complexity of kindergarten and first grade reading portions. We have noticed that some of our students achieved an advanced level score in the kindergarten or latter of two grade-bands, only to fall back to an intermediate level when they move to the next NYSESLAT grade-band. To reverse this trend, our certified ENL teachers work with both classroom teachers to target those ELLs whose growth is inconsistent. In addition, such students also receive other intervention services by AIS or RtI providers, as well as participating in all core curriculum activities. By second grade, many of the students who have attended P.S. 307 since kindergarten have achieved a level of proficient or advanced on the NYSESLAT. However, those who have achieved at an advanced level seem to get stuck at that level and struggle to make progress according to the NYSESLAT in the upper grades. To address this issue the ENL teachers and classroom teachers are working together alongside the administration to identify targeted strategies that can be used by both the classroom and ENL teachers to assist these students in both reading and writing (the identified areas of need). Also, now 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  that we are under new regulations, our transitioning and expanding ELLs get fewer ENL minutes, and those minutes may be given in any content area, not just literacy. We are noticing a correlation with this regulation and decrease movement from advanced to proficient on the NYSESLAT in the upper grades. In addition, as in the past, it has been especially difficult to move our ELLs with IEPs to proficiency. 21% of our ELLs who took the ELA in 2017 reached a Commanding level in NYSESLAT 2017 that year or previously. Although our ELLs are making great strides in acquiring the English language, they are still struggling to reach the 51-100% Citywide Percentile on the ELAs. We are brainstorming better ways of targeting such ELLs during integrated periods by providing co-teaching so that through two teachers, the higher level ELLs have access to more consistent small group time with the ENL teacher. ENL teachers pushing into a classroom during literacy periods are able to scaffold reading and writing lessons to make them more accessible for struggling readers and writers. When it is not possible to provide the co-teaching model in the literacy periods due to limited ENL teachers, ENL teachers will provide instruction in science, which will improve ELLs' conceptual and vocabulary knowledge, which are essential to reading. In the upper grades, we find that our new arrivals tend to improve one to two proficiency levels per year, depending on their native language and literacy levels. By fourth and fifth grade we find that the majority of students who have been with our school for at least three years achieve advanced status on the NYSESLAT. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? These findings are discussed by the ENL team and administrators prior to the start of each year to adequately group students by class. The program is adjusted each year to make accommodations to the changing needs and levels of our ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In our school, we have found push-in very effective for our higher level ELLs and pull-out effective for our newcomers. We have also found that spreading out our ELLs across all classrooms allows our ELLs the most interaction with Engish-proficient students, which aids in their English acquisition. Thus, in accordance with CR Part 154, we have an ENL teacher providing integrated ENL by pushing in to each classroom for 180 minutes (four periods) per week to address all ELLs (Entering through Commanding) and also have an ENL teacher pulling out both Entering and Emerging level ELLs for 180 minutes (four periods) per week for stand-alone instruction. In the integrated model, our ENL teachers teach ELA along with the classroom teacher in a co-teaching format and/or science. We like the co-teaching format, as we believe that it is the best setting for our ENL teachers to train our classroom teachers with ENL strategies, which we assume will eventually carry over to all subjects taught in the classroom. Ideally we like science to also be co-taught or taught by the ENL teacher in a pull-out model as we have done in the past. However, due to scheduling and budget limitations, at times the ENL teacher services the ELLs as the sole teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  For the stand-alone model, students are grouped according to language needs, and may be pulled-out across multiple grade levels. For example, newly arrived Entering students in grades one and two may be grouped together to focus on developing oral and aural English, as these are predecessors of developing reading and writing skills. Likewise, Emerging students on the same grade band will be pulled together to address their needs as determined by the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. In the upper grades, we often group newly arrived ELLs with low literacy backgrounds together in order to teach foundational literacy skills in addition to oral and aural skills. Those upper level ELLs with high native literacy often grasp such literacy concepts of English quickly and require more accelerated curriculums. b. TBE program. If applicable. At this time, we do not have any TBE classes. c. DL program. If applicable. At this time, we do not have any DL classes. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In preparing for 2017-18, we have scheduled an ENL teacher in every classroom for 180 minutes (four periods) per week. The ENL teacher will either teach independently or co-teach in the area of ELA or science. This time covers the mandate of Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding leveled ELLs through integrated ENL. These push-in periods also cover the mandated integrated ENL periods for Entering and Emerging leveled ELLs. In addition, an ENL teacher will provide stand alone ENL to Entering and Emerging ELLs, pulling them out for 180 minutes (four periods) per week according to their language acquisition needs. They may be pulled with students at their own grade level or with students within their grade band (1-2, 2-3, 3-4, and 4-5). At the moment, we only have a Freestanding ENL program and thus do not teach home languages. However, Spanish-speaking ELLs have access to literature in the home language both in paper and via MyOn, an online library. We also assess their native literacy levels to understand their background knowledge of literacy and to assist them in choosing leveled texts in their native language. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. During our push-in integrated ENL-through-science or ELA, all content is delivered thematically in English using the SIOP model. Thematic units allow students to deepen their level of understanding and master Tier III level terms. The SIOP model allows teachers to break down the language and the concepts appropriately, yet still teach with grade-level rigor. In the SIOP model, teachers discover students' background knowledge and front-load as necessary from there. They use visuals, including various forms of media as well as realia, songs and chants, graphic organizers, and Total Physical Response to develop concepts and vocabulary. Learning may occur through the gradual release of responsibility model, or through inquiry and investigation. During inquiry, students work collaboratively through the scientific method, jigsaw reading, reciprocal teaching, or literature circles. Throughout the lessons, all four modalities (Speaking, Listening, Reading, and Writing) are incorporated. We specifically focus on oral language development, as oral language complexity will translate into writing complexity and reading comprehension. At the culmination of lessons, students are pushed to reflect on their learning using the terminology and language structures taught during the lesson and throughout the thematic unit. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? While P.S. 307 currently only has a free-standing ENL program, we strive to ensure our ELLs are evaluated in their native languages when appropriate. We really want to know what knowledge our students have in all languages, not just the knowledge they are able to express in English. In order to accomplish this goal, we administer assessments in our students’ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  native languages whenever possible. Since the majority of our ELLs are native Spanish speakers, there are many opportunities for them to show what they know. For example, during running records, we allow our students to express their comprehension in the language of their choice. We also do a full assessment in the native language as new arrivals to build upon their native literacy knowledge. In the upper grades, our ELLs can choose to take the New York State mathematics and science tests in Spanish. In addition, our math curriculum, Go Math, provides online resources in Spanish and translates all unit assessments into Spanish as well, which our newcomers use side-by-side with the English ones. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. a. SIFE We currently have one SIFE students in the fifth grade and one SIFE student in the fourth grade (as well as new arrivals in second grade without native written literacy--these students do not qualify to be labeled as SIFE, but demonstrate the same needs as our upper-grades SIFE students). We also have one newcomer, who despite consistent schooling in his home country, also shares the needs of our two SIFE students. In order to address these students' needs, we first assess the student(s) to identify areas of strength and need, then place the student based on those strengths and weaknesses, and then employ additional intervention service and ongoing assessment to monitor their progress. Such students received 1:3 literacy intervention and 1:1 math intervention throughout the past academic year, in addition to her mandated ENL minutes. As with all students at P.S. 307, differentiated instruction is implemented to ensure the SIFE students' needs are met. These students frequently use the differentiated online programs such as XL Math, Lexia Core 5, and MyOn to support the development of foundational skills. Progress is monitored on these programs, and when students demonstrate difficulty, her teachers work with them to clarify and re-teach those misunderstood online teaching points. Such intervention occurs during stand-alone minutes and during an ENL after-school academy exclusively for SIFE students, during which other socialization and cultural knowledge is also shared. Finally, each SIFE student is matched with a buddy in the classroom who has the same home language, if possible, and will serve as a friend and resource for the SIFE student. b. Newcomers Our newcomers typically score at the Entering or Emerging levels, and thus they receive both integrated push-in and stand-alone pull-out periods. Newcomers in the upper grades (3-5) with low literacy skills in their native language receive stand-alone ENL together so that the teacher can build foundational literacy skills. Newcomers are closely monitored by their classroom and ENL teachers to ensure they are progressing both academically and socially. Both the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher examine the students’ data, make observations of the students, and conference with the students to assess their needs. If the student does not seem to be progressing, the teachers will meet to reassess the instructional plan. These students typically become a part of the Response to Intervention (RTI) groups based the specific literacy skill(s) where they are deficient. Newcomers also receive targeted instruction during an ENL after-school academy for recent arrivals. All newcomers also participate in BrainpopESL and Lexia Core 5, two online programs that develop language and literacy, respectively. c. Developing ELLs Depending on their proficiency level, and their individual needs, ELLs receiving services for multiple years will have their data reviewed and analyzed by the ENL team in conjunction with our data specialist. During the mandated amount of minutes for the student’s proficiency level, progress is constantly monitored. If the students' needs are below the needs of his/her classmates, s/he will receive literacy intervention through RtI. If the intervention does not seem to be working, the teachers will meet to reassess the instructional plan, and possibly move the student to Tier III RtI service. Also, these students close to becoming long-term ELLs are invited to an ENL "breakfast academy" where they are provided small-group instruction and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  mindset coaching for two days per week throughout the school year. These students are also invited to attend after-school academies and/or Saturday academies along with their grade level peers. d. Long-Term ELLs. For the 2017-18 school year, we have no projected long-term ELLs. However, P.S. 307 places great emphasis on providing rigorous academic intervention services to students who are identified as long term ELLs. Depending on their proficiency level, and their individual needs, long term ELLs have their data reviewed and analyzed by the ENL team and data specialist. Progress is constantly monitored and if the intervention does not seem to be working, the teachers will meet to reassess the instructional plan. Because in the past all of our long-term ELLs have had IEPs, the ENL teacher servicing such students also works with the special education committee to work toward their IEP goals in conjunction with their ENL goals. We feel that this collaboration is a vital component to these students’ success. e. Former ELLs: Since each of our classes will receive 180 minutes of push-in Integrated ENL instruction, our former ELLs benefit from the co-teaching and other interventions implemented by our ENL teachers (thus receiving minutes beyond the mandated 90-minute integrated services). In addition, if a former ELL would benefit from the work that is being done in an ENL group in their classroom, the ENL teacher will pull the student(s) into the group during group or independent work time. A list of former ELLs is kept along with the current ELL list to ensure that our ENL teachers are checking in on these students and working with them when they need intervention. Former ELLs at P.S. 307 receive all testing accommodations that they are entitled to on all assessments. These accommodations include: extended time, separate location, and bilingual glossaries. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For ELL students identified as having special needs, the current IEP is reviewed by ENL teachers working with these students to ensure that those mandates stated in the IEP are adhered to during ENL instruction. The ENL teachers collaborate with the special education classroom teachers and related service providers to review these students' data in both literacy and math to identify areas of strength and weakness to be addressed during ENL instruction. Within the mandated amount of minutes for the student’s proficiency level, ENL strategies and alternative academic interventions will be applied. Our teachers of ELLs work very hard to ensure that their environments are welcoming to ELLs and ELL-SWDs by providing visual representations, hands-on activities, concrete materials and examples, art activities and TPR activities. In addition, ENL teachers will employ strategies based on student need, including but not limited to: redirection, repeating directions, reading questions and directions aloud, and listing steps in a question or in directions with visual supplementation. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? P.S. 307 makes every attempt to adapt and modify curriculum to address the needs of our ELL-SWDs. In order to do this, supplemental aids are utilized to support these students in their classroom. Examples of these supplemental aids include, but are not limited to: scaffolding, visuals, kinesthetic activities, technological tools such as educational videos, computer games, listening centers, and iPads. To address the needs of this population during instructional time, ENL teachers ensure understanding of lesson objectives through formal and informal assessments, check-ins, and by analyzing student work. The ENL teachers then use this data to inform their instruction to assess the need for revisiting the lesson in the next session, moving on to the next objective or revisiting the lesson with a small group. In addition, throughout each lesson, ENL teachers ensure extra time for students to complete tasks, repeat directions, or to address student questions. When looking at scheduling for our ELL-SWDs, the administration at P.S. 307 makes every attempt to meet the diverse needs of each student. Many of our ELL-SWDs have been mainstreamed into general education classes and receive SETTS in addition to their ENL instruction. In third, fourth, and fifth grades, our several of our ELL-SWDs are in an ICT setting where the ENL teachers can push-in and collaborate directly with the special education teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Our ELL-SWDs may be grouped with other ELLs who have not been identified at SWD if they share a common area of need or proficiency level. Classroom teachers show flexibility in scheduling when groups of students stretch across classes. Our classroom teachers understand the importance of ENL instruction and therefore work with our ENL providers to ensure that their schedules and the ENL teacher schedules work together to allow for appropriate groupings for ENL instruction. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Since our current program is a freestanding ENL program, all content area material is delivered in English. Below is a description of the targeted intervention programs used for ELLs in ELA, mathematics, and science. Through ENL professional development programs, our entire staff has learned to implement proven ENL strategies and techniques such as the use of music, pictorial representations, activating prior knowledge, building background, kinesthetic activities, and Total Physical Response in order to help students succeed academically. All ELLs are eligible for all of the academic intervention services offered based on their academic needs. We use the following researched based programs for ELA academic intervention services: Fundations and Just Words by Wilson Reading, the Flying Start to Literacy guided reading series, and the Comprehension Toolkit. The AIS are provided to our students in a variety of methods. During the school-day we offer AIS for ELLs with IEPs, Tier II RtI for ELLs , and Tier III RtI for ELLs via Reading Recovery, well as the after school program, and Saturday academies. We have classroom teachers, content specialty teachers, ESOL certified teachers, EGCR Teachers, and F-status teachers providing these services for students. Across the grades, we find that our ELL students struggle the most with literacy. As the result of this observation, our interventions are focused primarily on language development and literacy skills. In addition, all ELLs participate in BrainPopESL, Lexia Core 5 online literacy skills program which is differentiated to tailor each student's literacy level. Students have also enjoyed MyOn, an online library of books, where students can read independently, or listen and read along. Books are available in both Spanish and English. P.S. 307 uses two programs for mathematics academic intervention services; Go Math! intervention and re-teaching resources and data driven, teacher planned intervention lessons. The academic intervention services are provided to our students in a variety of methods – via small group, during the school day, in the after school program and Saturday academies. These services are provided by classroom teacher, content specialty teachers, and senior F-status teachers. ELLs are targeted during these intervention sessions based on their mathematics performance data, and by ENL instructors during Title III mathematics Saturday academies. P.S. 307 has two full-time science specialty teachers who push into all of our classrooms to provide science instruction. Occasionally our ENL teachers also teach science. In science, we use the following programs/strategies for science academic intervention services: Buckle Down Science (Gr. 4), Measuring Up Science (Gr. 4) and data driven, teacher planned intervention lessons. We also provide an after-school Science academy for fourth grade students to enhance their experiences and knowledge of the scientific method. ENL teachers provide a Title III ENL science academy especially for our upper-grades ELLs. In grades K-3, the science teachers work with the students to research and create science fair projects to display at our Family Science Fair Night. In addition, Family Science workshops are offered to provide our students and their families with further science exposure and instruction. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In May 2015, school wide needs assessment survey was administered to all coaches and teaching staff regarding both teacher and student needs, including the needs our ouf ELLs and SWDs. An analysis of the student data collected, in addition to formal and informal teacher observations done by the administration, revealed that our students need to build independence and stamina as readers and writers, and in conjunction, develop the essential habit self-monitoring. In order to build such independence, improvement is needed in their critical thinking skills--such as determining importance and finding evidence to support theses--as well as their word and conceptual knowledge. Upon recommendation of our former literacy consultant Linda Weinbaum, we applied to work with Columbia University's Teachers' College reading and writing units and professional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  development package. After a thorough review of the new TC curriculum, we believed it would help students build the strategies discussed above and develop the habits necessary to increase their mastery of the Common Core Learning Standards. We have already seen positive results and are excited to share that our partnership continues. In addition to our TCRWP literacy partnership, we plan to continue other new initiatives, such as our ENL family trips and increased experiential learning. For kindergarten, we aim to incorporate a year-long project on our community where we will visit, learn about, and re-create the landmarks and professions within our neighborhood. In the third and now expanding to the fourth grade, we will extend our new partnership with the New Victory Theatre to teach acting and storytelling. Both of these initiatives will work into our larger study of oral language, which we will be studying and addressing with a cohort of four other Teachers College Reading and Writing Project schools. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have never had a bilingual program. We do not have sufficient demand from parents to open one at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. In terms of school programs, ELLs are offered the same programs and activities as their peers. All after school programs, Saturday programs, workshops, school clubs, field trips, etc. are offered to ELLs in the same manner as their peers. P.S. 307 does have ELL afterschool program that is available only to ELLs and former ELLs. English Language Learners benefit from the same curriculum as their English proficient peers, as well as the same access to physical education, music education and participation in the arts programs in the school. For example, ELLs fully participate in the theatre and dance performances each year that are presented by the school in partnership with Town Hall. An Afterschool ELL Institute funded by Title III was piloted during the 2006-2007 school year, and has been in place each year since. ELL focused programs provide additional reinforcement for ENL and literacy instruction. Students meet by grade, two times per week, for an hour and fifteen minutes, for this extra ENL and literacy instructional time. The focus of the afterschool programs vary by group and grade: grade-level and ENL teachers collaboratively analyze student data (i.e. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores, running records) to group students and identify a focus for the after school time based on students’ needs. Some examples of after school groups’ focuses include, but are not limited to: developing oral proficiency, decoding and phonics, guided reading, and word-attack skills. We offer this after-school institute to all students in grades K-2 eligible as per NYSITELL and NYSESLAT test results. In grades 3-5, beginner ELLs participate in a program to address newcomer needs. All other ELLs in 3-5 participate in a non-Title III funded after school program focused on literacy and mathematics. During the literacy institute an ENL teacher focuses on targeted skills based on student data with the ELLs in grades three, four and five. These students are also grouped by grade and areas of need. Since the 2009-2010 school year, P.S. 307 has included ENL in the Saturday Academies for students in grades 2-5. An ENL-certified teacher works with the ELLs in these Saturday academies to supplement the classroom teacher’s instruction with additional scaffolding, visual representations and vocabulary instruction. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Students develop their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills in English through a variety of ENL methodologies aimed at maximizing students’ understanding of newly introduced concepts, such as: Total Physical Response (TPR), singing, chanting, rhyming, building background, activating prior knowledge, using graphic organizers, using meta-cognitive strategies, incorporating a variety of media, and the use of bilingual glossaries. Teachers have also differentiated instruction by grouping, as per NYSITELL and Spring NYSESLAT results, informal assessments, conferencing, and teacher observations in other subject areas, such as mathematics and science, to differentiate instruction. Classroom and ENL teachers collaborate and/or co-teach to ensure that ENL strategies are incorporated into all subject areas to meet the needs of individual ELL students. Intervention materials are chosen based on student need, but some of the materials used come from sources such as: Flying Start Guided Reading Kits, the Fountas and Pinnell Intervention Kit, and Wilson's Fundations and Just Words programs. Over the past couple of years, P.S. 307 has worked relentlessly to integrate technology into our curriculum. Throughout the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  school year, ELLs use many different types of technology in many different settings. English Language Learners use computers along with their non-ELL peers with various literacy and mathematics software programs to support them in these content areas. Such programs include Lexia Core 5, MyOn, BrainPopESL, XL Math, and Big Brainz Math. ELLs are also given the opportunity to work on websites such as Starfall.com and Thinkfinity.org to allow them access to content with visual and audio resources. In mathematics, GoMath! provides computer games to assist students in reaching their mathematics goals. ELLs are also exposed to the iPad on a regular basis as they use these devices in small groups to practice basic literacy. All classrooms are equipped with EnoBoards and ELMOs. These two technological tools assist teachers in presenting lessons and materials visually, which has proven to be very beneficial to ELLs. In addition, P.S. 307 uses online resources such as pbs.org, Netflix, arkive.org, and schooltube.org to find video and images for social studies and science in order to build background experiences for our students. These resources have proved successful for all of our students ELLs and non-ELLs alike. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? P.S. 307 has a Freestanding ENL program and does not typically deliver instruction in native languages. However, two out of four of our ENL teachers (as well as the majority of our school staff) are bilingual and are able to provide native language support to our Spanish-speaking ELLs when necessary. P.S. 307 has a number of books in Spanish, as well as bilingual glossaries and content specific glossaries which are all accessible for student use. Students also have access to texts in Spanish on MyOn, an online library. In addition, some of the New York State examinations are given to students in their native language as well as English. Students who need additional support in their native language are seated with a buddy who speaks their native language in addition to English. These partnerships allow for translations from same aged peers, allowing our ELLs to feel more comfortable when needing additional support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Since all of our AIS providers and ENL teachers review the student data, they are aware of students’ levels and academic performance. These individuals use age and level appropriate ENL strategies in their instruction. Professional development in ENL strategies is offered to classroom teachers to empower them to make informed instructional decisions with regards to their ELLs. ENL teachers also give staff-wide development sessions on ENL best practices multiple times throughout the schoolyear to ensure that classroom teachers are well-informed. The school makes every effort to ensure that all ELLs are given equal access to grade and age appropriate materials and services. AIS and ENL providers who are working with our ELLs have background knowledge and prior experience with the grade levels and materials with which they are working. For example, the literacy AIS provider working in our kindergarten and first grade classrooms is a former early childhood classroom teacher. All of the resources used by these providers have been proven to be successful with ELLs. If a resource is new, it is closely monitored and evaluated to determine its effectiveness in progressing students academically. Students develop their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills in English through a variety of ENL methodologies aimed at maximizing students’ understanding of newly introduced concepts, such as: Total Physical Response (TPR), singing, chanting, rhyming, building background, activating prior knowledge, using graphic organizers, using meta-cognitive strategies, incorporating a variety of media, and the use of bilingual glossaries. Teachers have also differentiated instruction by grouping, as per NYSITELL and Spring NYSESLAT results, informal assessments, conferencing, and teacher observations in other subject areas, such as mathematics and science, to differentiate instruction. Classroom and ENL teachers collaborate and/or co-teach to ensure that ENL strategies are incorporated into all subject areas to meet the needs of individual ELL students. Intervention materials are chosen based on student need, but some of the materials used come from sources such as: Flying Start Guided Reading Kits, the Fountas and Pinnell Intervention Kit, and Wilson's Fundations and Just Words programs. Over the past couple of years, P.S. 307 has worked relentlessly to integrate technology into our curriculum. Throughout the school year, ELLs use many different types of technology in many different settings. English Language Learners use computers along with their non-ELL peers with various literacy and mathematics software programs to support them in these content areas. Such programs include Lexia Core 5, MyOn, BrainPopESL, XL Math, and Big Brainz Math. ELLs are also given the opportunity to work on websites such as Starfall.com and Thinkfinity.org to allow them access to content with visual and audio resources. In mathematics, GoMath! provides computer games to assist students in reaching their mathematics goals. ELLs are also exposed to the iPad on a regular basis as they use these devices in small groups to practice basic literacy. All classrooms are equipped with EnoBoards and ELMOs. These two technological tools assist teachers in presenting lessons and materials visually, which has proven to be very beneficial to ELLs. In addition, P.S. 307 uses online resources such 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  as pbs.org, Netflix, arkive.org, and schooltube.org to find video and images for social studies and science in order to build background experiences for our students. These resources have proved successful for all of our students ELLs and non-ELLs alike. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? NA; we do not share our building. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Students develop their reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills in English through a variety of ENL methodologies aimed at maximizing students’ understanding of newly introduced concepts, such as: Total Physical Response (TPR), singing, chanting, rhyming, building background, activating prior knowledge, using graphic organizers, using meta-cognitive strategies, incorporating a variety of media, and the use of bilingual glossaries. Teachers have also differentiated instruction by grouping, as per NYSITELL and Spring NYSESLAT results, informal assessments, conferencing, and teacher observations in other subject areas, such as mathematics and science, to differentiate instruction. Classroom and ENL teachers collaborate and/or co-teach to ensure that ENL strategies are incorporated into all subject areas to meet the needs of individual ELL students. Intervention materials are chosen based on student need, but some of the materials used come from sources such as: Flying Start Guided Reading Kits, the Fountas and Pinnell Intervention Kit, and Wilson's Fundations and Just Words programs. Over the past couple of years, P.S. 307 has worked relentlessly to integrate technology into our curriculum. Throughout the school year, ELLs use many different types of technology in many different settings. English Language Learners use computers along with their non-ELL peers with various literacy and mathematics software programs to support them in these content areas. Such programs include Lexia Core 5, MyOn, BrainPopESL, XL Math, and Big Brainz Math. ELLs are also given the opportunity to work on websites such as Starfall.com and Thinkfinity.org to allow them access to content with visual and audio resources. In mathematics, GoMath! provides computer games to assist students in reaching their mathematics goals. ELLs are also exposed to the iPad on a regular basis as they use these devices in small groups to practice basic literacy. All classrooms are equipped with EnoBoards and ELMOs. These two technological tools assist teachers in presenting lessons and materials visually, which has proven to be very beneficial to ELLs. In addition, P.S. 307 uses online resources such as pbs.org, Netflix, arkive.org, and schooltube.org to find video and images for social studies and science in order to build background experiences for our students. These resources have proved successful for all of our students ELLs and non-ELLs alike. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? As an elementary school, P.S. 307 does not offer language electives to its students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? P.S. 307 does not have a Dual Language Program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Instructional personnel who service ELL students, including common branch teachers, content-area teachers, paraprofessionals, and special education teachers will be provided with professional development early in the school year on issues that pertain to the ELL population. Professional development will occur during classroom teacher’s common prep periods, pre- and post-observation conferences with administration, during lunch shares, during professional development days such as Election Day, and after school. Also, P.S. 307 offers Professional Development on every Monday after school for all staff, as per the new contract. Professional development for instructional personnel who service ELL students is completed in many ways including, but not limited to, in-house by employees of the school, in-house by outside professionals, and outside of the school. Members of our ENL staff receive weekly e-mails from the Office of English Language Learners highlighting professional development opportunities for educators of ELLs. These opportunities are shared with administration and typically administration will select teachers, ENL or non-ENL, to attend. Any ENL or non-ENL teacher who wishes to attend these professional development opportunities can do so upon approval from administration. When a member of the staff at 307 attends a training that he or she feels would be beneficial to the whole staff, that teacher will turnkey the information to interested staff members. These turnkeys may take place during regularly scheduled professional development times and/or lunch-and-learn sessions. P.S. 307 will continue to seek out these professional development opportunities for both ENL-certified and non-ENL certified staff members. The school frequently checks the websites of the New York City Office of English Language Learners, the Bronx BETAC at Fordham University and Teacher’s College for these opportunities. Professional development is offered by the administration as well as by the ENL Coordinator and experienced ENL teachers on Election Day or during Monday professional development sessions, in-house. These sessions are used to explain the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT tests, how the scores can help to further expand teachers’ understanding about the tests their students are required to take, and how to use the ENL data to drive instruction. They are also used to review ENL strategies essential for ELL students so that teaching and learning can be most effective. Finally, information pertaining to ELLs obtained at district meetings and/or other professional development events that pertain to the tasks performed by our school secretaries (e.g. ATS functions, the intake process, recording keeping, etc.) are turn-keyed by the attendee to the secretaries as soon as possible. For example, after attending a network meeting during which it was made clear that an ENL certified teacher or administrator must administer the HLIS and perform the initial informal interview, our ENL Coordinator met with the secretaries to turnkey this information to them. This constant communication and keeps all staff members on the same page to ensure clarity of procedures. Our fall calendar of professional learning for non-ELL teachers has included training on the new ENL Progressions, modifications to CR Part 154, the use of Lexia Learning for our ELLs, and Language Translation and Interpretation access. Upcoming professional learning will include vocabulary development for ELLs, project-based learning for ELLs, and enhancing our contextual supports to ELLs. Professional learning for our ELL teachers includes in-house co-teaching strategies for our integrated ENL periods, Teachers College ELL workshops, the Nuts and Bolts of ENL for Ms. Nichols, a first-year ENL teacher, and various other opportunities that arise during the schoolyear. The ultimate goal of our professional development is to assist all staff members in equipping ELL students with the skills necessary to meet English proficiency on the NYSESLAT examination and current promotional grade criteria. This will afford them opportunities to be high academic achievers as they progress in their school career. Should a teacher or other staff member come across an issue pertaining to ELLs of which he or she is not knowledgeable, all efforts will be made by the administration and ENL staff to assist that staff member in learning the skills it takes to address the issue or to locate a professional development opportunity that will address the issue. All teachers at P.S. 307 attend weekly professional development sessions on Monday afternoons. These sessions are facilitated by our literacy and mathematics consultants from Generation Ready. These sessions focus on planning, implementing and reflecting upon instruction based on the CCLS. Segments of these professional development sessions focus on differentiating 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  instruction for different groups of students including ELLs. In addition to our in-house professional development, all teachers are eligible to attend any outside professional development that may match their needs as a teaching professional. Our ENL teachers and administration receive weekly e-mails from the Office of English Language Learners that highlight opportunities for professional development on topics related to ELLs as well as emails regarding professional learning opportunities facilitated by the Bronx Borough Field Support Center. The administration and ENL teachers identify staff members who would benefit from this training. Since it is not possible for all of our staff members to attend every meeting, every effort is made to have a turn-key session of important information obtained at these professional development meetings. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To respond to the needs of our ELL students transitioning to middle school, our ENL Coordinator, Ms. Maturen, will work with our fifth graders to ensure that they are getting ready for the transition to middle school. Ms. Maturen has worked in a middle school with ENL students and can help ease some of the students’ anxiety as well as to answer questions that the students may have. In addition, our bilingual Parent Coordinator works with parents and upper grade staff members to ensure all middle school applications are completed and submitted. The Parent Coordinator and ENL teachers are also available to answer and address any questions or concerns the parents may have about their child’s transition to middle school. Thankfully, through the Office of ELLs, our ENL staff has had the opportunity to attend several ELL-centered PDs over the past two years, including RtI for ELLs with Harvard University’s School of Education, Building a Strong Tier I for ELLs with Diane Haager, Unpacking the NYSESLAT, and Scaffolding Instruction for ELLs with Stephanie Harvey. Our network, which will now be supplanted by the Borough Field Support Center, offered several beneficial PDs to our ENL teachers over the past two years, including Nuts and Bolts of ESL Compliance, AMAO Tool and Data Anaysis, and NYSESLAT Scoring Workshops. Often, one of our non-ENL teachers accompanies one of our ENL teachers for such PDs. Such information is turn-keyed to all teachers during our Monday professional development series, allowing non-ENL staff to access the learning. We are looking forward to more of these high-quality professional developments offered by the Office of ELLs and by the new Bronx Borough Field Center in the upcoming years. Both ENL and non-ENL teachers have already registered for a few upcoming ENL PDs including Vocabulary Instruction that Works, the Disporportionality of ELLs Identified in Need of Special Education, and the Nuts and Bolts of ENL. Record of each and every external workshop attended by staff members of P.S. 307 is maintained in the school-wide Professional Development Binder. For in-house PDs, meeting agendas, attendance sign-ins, and any accompanying materials are filed. For external workshops, a copy of the agenda along with teacher attendance information is saved. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In order to provide these annual individual meetings, our ENL team will reach out to parents at the beginning of the school-year to make appointments for individual meetings with parents. We will attempt to schedule these meetings for Tuesday afternoons during mandated parent outreach time. However, we know that many of our parents work and are unavailable during the weekday, and thus we plan to hold appointments on two Saturdays of the year as well as on weekday evenings. Once meeting dates are set, our support team in the office takes care of reminding parents of such meetings. One of our ENL teachers is fluent in Spanish, and will provide translation services as needed for our Spanish-speaking parents. We have yet to have a family that requests interpretation in another language, as our current non-Spanish speaking ELLs have an English-speaking parent. However, should a parent request an interpreter in a language other than English or Spanish, the school will contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit to request an interpreter for the event or use the over-the-phone interpretation provided by the Translation and Interpretations Unit’s telephone service. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are given equal opportunities to participate in any and all family activities and programs that P.S. 307 offers. Families are involved through a variety of venues. Initially, ELL Family Orientation Meetings are held to inform parents/families of the various program choices they have. In the fall of each year, Family Curriculum Institutes are held in each grade with the goal of providing families with opportunities to learn about the literacy, mathematics, science and social studies units, and how parents can support their children at home. During the 2014-15 school year, we incorporated Science Family Night into our science fair during which parents participated in science experiments similar to those their students experienced during the school year. Experiments were provided at every grade level and were very popular. During the family night, parents receive detailed information on the expectations of the New York State science test and the importance of exposing students to all the areas of science. As with other family workshops, Science Family Night presentations and handouts were provided in both English and Spanish to assist parents in accessing the workshop content. Science Family Night will again be provided during the 2015-2016 school year. Parents are also involved in other ways. We invite ELL parents specifically to workshops hosted by our ENL teachers during each marking period regarding how to support and foster their child's language development both in and outside of school. Family workshops are held throughout the year to address such issues as: asthma, hygiene, healthy eating, safety, and the state mathematics and ELA tests. Throughout the year, during the school day and on Saturdays, family institutes/workshops will also be held in order to maximize parent and family participation. These institutes afford parents opportunities to learn a variety of literacy and mathematics skills/strategies and how to support their children at home. Through the translation and interpretation work of our bilingual Parent Coordinator, parent volunteers, and our PTA executive board, all presentations and materials are provided in both English and Spanish to assist parents and families in accessing workshop content. These orientations and workshops also devote segments to possible modifications and/or enhancements for parents with ELL students. The workshops are provided for families on every grade level. The success of these workshops is measured by the families’ enthusiasm, feedback, and desire for additional workshops. All ELL parents are offered equal opportunities to participate in all of the activities mentioned above as well as in any additional trips, performances, or presentations done within the school. Parent and family participation is further encouraged by providing participants with gift bags of instructional materials and manipulatives that will assist them in reinforcing concepts with children at home. In addition to workshops and various family activities, all parents are encouraged to join the PTA and/or to volunteer within the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yolanda Valez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Luisa Pineiro School of Scienc School DBN: 10x307 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Yolanda Valez Title Principal Debra Springsteen Assistant Principal Liza Ocasio Parent Coordinator Michelle Maturen ENL/Bilingual Teacher Yanira Castro Parent Elizabeth Nichols/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Marcy Schickler Teacher/Subject Area Sheila McChesney Yvonne Rivera Coach Coach Denny Matos School Counselor Maribel Hulla Maria Guerrero Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Laura O'Connell Other Teacher/Related Ser Lisa Rosario Roman Other Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x307 School Name: Luisa Pineiro Fuentes School for Science and Discovery Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) Liza Ocasio Parent Coordinator Michelle Maturen ENL Teacher No No No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When new students enter our school, data is acquired initially through Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS) and initial registration interviews. Language preferences are also noted on the blue emergency contact cards which parents fill out immediately. For students who transfer to our school from within the DOE, we also use ATS data to find the parents' preferred language for communication, including the RAPL and UPPG reports. For Spanish-dominant families, our school has significant Spanish-English bilingual staff, and they serve as translators and interpreters to these families. For families whose dominant language is non-English or Spanish, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  our Language Access Coordinators will reach out to families whose parents' preferred language is neither language nor Spanish to further assess written translation and oral interpretation needs. For routine documents, we use the templates provided on the Translation and Interpretation intranet site. Should a family need a interpreter for a language other than English or Spanish, the school will contact Language Line for over-the-phone interpretations. Should we need documents translated into Spanish, we utilize our staff for on-site translation services. Should we need translation into another language, we will use the services available from the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Every effort is made to have documents and dates of meetings planned ahead of time to allow for any delay that may take place in the translation of these documents or in the reserving of an interpreter for scheduled meetings. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Tagalog Hausa Amharic Arabic Bengali 243 141 2 1 1 2 1 62% 36% <1% <1% <1% <1% <1% 243 141 1 1 <1% 2 1 52% 47& <1% <1% <1% <1% <1% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English and Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families School Handbook September Parent Involvement Contract/Bill of Rights and Responsibilities November Principal-to-Family Letters year-long Newsletters bi-monthly Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. The school handbook has been translated into Spanish by In-school staff. For parents that require translation into other languages, we will pursue translation through the Translation and Interpretation Unit for DOE-covered languages (e.g. Arabic, Bengali). For non-DOE-covered languages, we will either assign staff to call parents using the Language Line to inform them of the handbook essentials or use a DOE vendor to translate the document. The Parent Involvement Contract has been translated into Spanish by In-school staff. For parents that require translation into other languages, we will pursue translation through the Translation and Interpretation Unit for DOE-covered languages (e.g. Arabic, Bengali). For non-DOE-covered languages, we will either assign staff to call parents using the Language Line to inform them of the contract essentials or use a DOE vendor to translate the document. Our Principal-to-Family Letters are routinely translated into Spanish by In-school staff. For parents that require translation into other languages, we will assign staff to call parents using the Language Line to inform them of the letter content. If it is a DOE-central newsletter, we will utilize the pre-translated templates available on the intranet for DOE-covered languages (e.g. Spanish, Arabic, or Bengali). For parents that require translation into other languages, we will assign staff to call parents using the Language Line to inform them of the newsletter content. For non-centralized newsletters, we routinely translate them into Spanish by In-school staff. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  School Calendar monthly Parent Engagement Workshop Notification bi-monthly Permission Slips monthly Discipline Code September Respect For All Brochure September Progress Reports/Report Cards November, March, & June For all other languages we will use the language line to communicate this information to parents. Our school calendars are routinely translated into Spanish by In-school staff. For parents that require translation into other languages, we will assign staff to call parents using the Language Line to inform them of the calendar content. Our workshop notifications are routinely translated into Spanish by In-school staff. For parents that require translation into other languages, we will assign staff to call parents using the Language lLne to inform them of the workshop details. For DOE-covered languages (e.g. Arabic, Bengali), we utlize the pre-translated permission slips available on the intranet. For non-DOE-covered languages, we will assign staff to call parents using the Language Line to inform them of the field trip content. For DOE-covered languages (e.g. Arabic, Bengali), we utlize the pre-translated permission slips available on the intranet. For non-DOE-covered languages, we will assign staff to call parents using the Language Line to inform them of the field trip content. For DOE-covered languages (e.g. Arabic, Bengali), we utlize the pre-translated Respect For All brochures available on the intranet. For non-DOE-covered languages, we will assign staff to call parents using the Language line to inform them of the brochure's content. For DOE-covered languages (e.g. Arabic, Bengali), we utlize the pre-generated report cards available through STARS. For non-DOE-covered languages, we will contract interpreters to be present during Parent Teacher Conferences, if possible. If not possible, we will assign staff to call parents using the 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  Language Line to inform them of the report card. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide ELL Parent Orientation September Back-to-School Curriculum Night September Parent-Teacher Meetings year-long Parent-Teacher Conferences November, March, & May Family Science Night June interpretation service(s)? One of our several bilingual staff is always present to interpret for all meetings where a Spanish dominant parent is present. Should a parent have a preferred language that one of our staff does not speak fluently, we will use the over-the-phone interpretation services. One of our several bilingual staff is always present to interpret for all meetings where a Spanish dominant parent is present. Should a parent have a preferred language that one of our staff does not speak fluently, we will use the over-the-phone interpretation services. One of our several bilingual staff is always present to interpret for all meetings where a Spanish dominant parent is present. Should a parent have a preferred language that one of our staff does not speak fluently, we will use the over-the-phone interpretation services. One of our several bilingual staff is always present to interpret for all meetings where a Spanish dominant parent is present. We are expecting non-English/non-Spanish speaking parents in our incoming kindergarten cohort, and we will make all attempts to hire an in-person interpreter for the Parent-Teacher conferences. Should an interpreter not be possible, we will use the over-the-phone interpretation services. One of our several bilingual staff is always present to interpret for all 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  Parent Workshops year-long Teacher or Attendance Home Outreach year-long IEP Meetings year-long meetings where a Spanish dominant parent is present. Should a parent have a preferred language that one of our staff does not speak fluently, we will use the over-the-phone interpretation services. One of our several bilingual staff is always present to interpret for all meetings where a Spanish dominant parent is present. We will make all attempts to hire an in-person interpreter for parent workshops since real-time interpretation through the Language Line is difficult when outside parties present workshops. One of our several bilingual staff is always present to interpret for all meetings where a Spanish dominant parent is present. Should a parent have a preferred language that one of our staff does not speak fluently, we will use the over-the-phone interpretation services. One of our several bilingual staff is always present to interpret for all meetings where a Spanish dominant parent is present. Due to the technical language of an IEP meeting, an in-house interpreter may prefer that the expert interpreters of the Language Line do the translation. We will also use the over-the-phone interpretation services for non-Spanish preferred languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We have had on-site school emergencies in the past where students have had to be dismissed early. This is due to the condition of our rented building. Whenever teachers leave the school they take all emergency contact information with them from the classroom. Bilingual staff are assigned to call the Spanish-dominant families. We are able to use the over-the-phone interpretation services to communicate with non-English/non-Spanish speaking parents from teachers' cell phones as well. Several teachers have the Language Line number saved in their cell phone contacts so they are able to make calls to non-English speaking parents at home or whenever communication is necessary. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All members of the school staff will be invited to a staff-wide meeting in the fall to discuss the Chancellor's Regulation A-663 and the Office of Language and Interpretation services. All staff will be reminded of how to use the over-the-phone translation services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As a school, we will continue to fulfill Section VII of Chancellor’s Regulations A-663 (Translations) by providing timely translation and distribution of critical communications. Translations of routine notification documents, provided by the Translation and Interpretation Unit’s intranet site (http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit) will continue to be utilized. We also will continue use our bilingual staff and the translation services at the Translation and Interpretation Unit to translate many in-school documents. In addition, we will continue to inform parents as to how to obtain interpretation if it is not readily available. We will continue to provide interpretation services during school hours to those parents whose primary language is one which our staff and/or parent volunteers can speak. In addition, for all parent meetings, we utilize all bilingual staff, school aides, psychologists, and social workers to translate information for all parents that require translation. For our new families without an English or Spanish-speaking parent, we will attempt to hire an on-site interpreter for parent-teacher conferences and key meetings, and use the over-the-phone interpretation at all other times. In the entryway hall, and highly visible to parents, is our welcome poster, Language ID Guides are placed in the main office, the ENL room, and the security desk. The parent coordinator, Ms. Ocasio, also has all documents available to non-English dominant parents, including the parent's guide to language access and the translated Bill of Rights. Finally, information on the Translation and Interpretation Unit, including written request forms, telephone translation services, vendor contract information for in-person translation is kept on file in the main office for easy access in the event that a parent needs further translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We use the NYCDOE Parent Survey to get a overall idea of how parents feel about the quality and availability of communication services. Specifically, we look at parent responses to the following prompts: a) parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their child's school (95% agree), b) their child's school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand 2018-19 SCEP-FL 89  (97% agree), c) school staff regularly communicate with them about how they can help their child learn (92% agree), d) parents/guardians have communicated with their child's teacher about their child's performance sometimes or often since the beginning of the school year (92% agree), and e) the principal/school leader encourages feedback from parents/guardians and the community through regular meetings with parent/guardian and teacher leaders (93% agree). These responses, current as of the 2016-17 Parent Survey, provide us with indicators demonstrating how many parents are satisfied with the quality and availability of services. They also help us revise policies and practices when necessary. Also, feedback from parents at the School Leadership Team meetings also provides crucial feedback for revisions. Our office staff and teachers are also receptive to parent concerns. We would like to improve our use of parent feedback to better our communication with parents, as both feedback and parent-staff communication are areas of improvement for us in the aformentioned parent survey. Our scores were also slightly lower that the previous year regarding staff and teacher communication with parents. Thus, in order to gather feedback from LEP parents in regards to language services at the school, we will survey LEP parents in regards to their experiences with communication at our school. We will send home the survey in both Spanish and English, and inquire about ability to communicate with the office staff, their child's teacher, and the school administration. We will also ask about the ease of understanding documents and the quality of translation. We will also ask for suggestions. This survey will occur at the beginning and end of the year so we can accurately assess how well we have responded to the feedback from parents. In order to initiate this survey, we will import the names of LEP parents from ATS into Excel. We will then use the MailMerge fuction on Word to create surveys with the parents' names as well as labels for affixing to the letters. For those parents whose preferred language is not Spanish, we will reach out to them via the Language Line to inquire about their responses to the survey. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 90 
