2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X312 School Name: MILLENNIUM ART ACADEMY Principal: HERMAN GUY 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Millennium Art Academy 08X312 320800010312 9, 10, 11, 12, SE School Number (DBN): 1980 Lafayette Avenue, Bronx, NY 10473 718-824-0978 718-824-0963 Phone Number: Lillian Triglianos Fax: Ltriglianos@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Email Address: Herman Guy Juanita Claxton Janeikka Benjamin Brendan Connolly N/A Student Reps: Nicole Chow AlanisDelgado Kenyatta Funderberk District Information 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address: Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 CStaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, 8 th Floor, Bronx, NY 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Herman Guy Juanita Claxton Jannieka Benjamin Deidre Crosby N/A Nicole Chow AlanisDelgado Dalaila Germosen Emily Rodriguez BrandiceMassey *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5 Signature (Blue Ink) Name N/A Andrew Fleitman Brendan Connolly Angelica Mendoza Leda Goodwin Dana Elden RebecaGarcia Elsa Aguirre Position and Constituent Group Represented CBO Representative, if applicable UFT/Teacher Member/Chairperson UFT/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  1. What is your school’s mission statement? Vision Section 4: SCEP Overview Millennium Art Academy (MAA) is a public High School founded with the paradigm that art, humanity and exploratory education combined, will assist students to graduate with the necessary skills for college, careers and community. Since it opened its doors in 2003, the mission of Millennium Art Academy High School continues to center on “preparing graduates for the rigors of college, careers, and community via artistic, interdisciplinary, and humanistic engagements.” At MAA, our caring faculty and support staff are dedicated to educating and supporting the whole-child via strategic instruction and guided youth-development. MAA believes that all children can achieve success through student centered inquiry based learning. It is through this methodology that all students, including special education and ELLs explore education in an inclusive environment. We believe that each student has unique talents, and we are dedicated to helping each student realize his or her unique truth within the framework of an intellectually, creatively inspiring, ‘respect for all’, nurturing environment. - In essence, at MAA, we believe that character, self-esteem, and academic achievement are indivisible, and we continuously encourage and celebrate growth and achievement in all that MAA students do. We want our students to advance in life with integrity by being emphatically mindful of others while advocating for justice and equality as they prepare for adult independence. Our school’s approach to fostering a nurturing positive culture results in a safe inclusive environment where all students can achieve success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our Instructional and Support Programs MAA offers a comprehensive array of core, honors, and AP classes, as well as a variety of elective classes that include comprehensive art classes, drama, science exploration and college and career planning. It is our goal to infuse art, literacy, and technology in all subject area classes (to enhance subject matter lessons and to increase our student’s literacy levels as needed due to item analysis). Our special education students are supported by a team of dual certified teachers who serve students in Integrated Co-Teaching Classrooms, Special Education Teacher Support Services, and related services during the school day and after school. One hundred percent of our special education students attend classes in the least restrictive environment. All special education students are evaluated at the beginning of the school year to determine best practices for each student and monitor progress. We have systems in place, so that we can employ constant monitoring of attendance and academic performance (Are you green), and in providing appropriate academic and social interventions. Intervention may take the form of counseling, parent-teacher-student conferences, IEP meetings, PPT meetings, supplementary instruction, group and individual tutorials, and the provision of social welfare supports such as medical (Montefiore Medical Clinic), support for students in temporary housing, and post-secondary educational planning. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our special education students are supported by a team of dual certified teachers who serve students in Integrated Co-Teaching Classrooms, Special Education Teacher Support Services, and related services during the school day and after school. One hundred percent of our special education students attend classes in the least restrictive 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  environment. All special education students are evaluated at the beginning of the school year to determine best practices for each student and monitor progress. We have systems in place, so that we can employ constant monitoring of attendance and academic performance (Are you green), and in providing appropriate academic and social interventions. Intervention may take the form of counseling, parent-teacher-student conferences, IEP meetings, PPT meetings, supplementary instruction, group and individual tutorials, and the provision of social welfare supports such as medical (Montefiore Medical Clinic), support for students in temporary housing, and post-secondary educational planning. MAA also has a NEST program to provide access and meet the needs of students on the autism spectrum. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The element of the Framework for Great Schools in which MAA made the most progress was in the area of trust, where we exceeded the target. Our key area of focus for the 2018-2019 SY is Rigorous Instruction. Millennium's will address Rigourous instruction on the CEP through literacy development in the form of academic vocabulary. This will be integrated through our CEP goal under Effective School Leadership where MAA will aim to bolster our CUNY Proficiency levels on the ELA and Mathematics Regent Exams. In order to better support the school, and teacher's instructional practice, Millennium will invest in Generation Ready Educational Consultants, Teaching Matters, CITE Professional Development, ELA/Math supports and Rewards Program for SPED and ELL, Technology, Smartboards for every classroom, 5 computer carts, NEWS ELA, to directly support our teachers, specifically teachers who are preparing for ELA and Mathematics Regents exams. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X312 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 432 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 6 6 10 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 29 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 73.0% % Attendance Rate 71.3% % Reduced Lunch 7.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.2% 67.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 6.25 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 72% 73% 70.0% 1.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Hispanic, ED, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A YES N/A YES No N/A 136 111 84.4% 1.2% 28.0% 26.2% 1.9% 1.9% 4 8% 7.1 N/A N/A 76% 74% 70.1% 18% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged YES ALL STUDENTS YES 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A N/A x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's Quality Review Report recommendations from the 2016-2017 SY, which were aligned with the six DTSDE Tenents, identified Tenant 3.5 as a growth area. In order for MAA's strategies and practices to align with the concepts in the highly effective column of Tenent 3, the school should develop a comprehensive assessment calendar which includes benchmarks, rubrics, strategical pedagogical supports, and an explicit feedback system so the data leads to adjusted instruction, effective use of purposeful grouping, improved student performance and long range planning. Our designation as a Focus School is due to the challenges of our subgroups meeting AYP in ELA and Math. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  This area of focus informed annual goal #1. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 1:: In order to increase student engagement in rigorous discussions and daily tasks, by 2019, teachers will deepen their understanding of the arc of instruction, with attention to productive struggle, developing academic vocabulary, and the implementation of rubrics within departments, as evidenced by data collected during instructional walkthroughs and formal/informal observations. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Action Plan ● Creation of streamlined assessments for all core subjects to inform inquiry meetings and Measure of Teacher Performance (MOTP). All teachers. September 29, 2018, monthly through June 28, 2019 Admin Team, BFSC, Department Chairs, Peer Collaborative Lead Teachers Measure: - Beginning September 2018, assessment of student data will begin on a quarterly basis. ● Bi-weekly inquiry meetings to review student performance of streamlined assessments and create grade appropriate and literacy-based instructional goals based on performance. Measure: MOTP in domains 3b, 3c, and 3d ● Support teachers that need improvement by developing mentoring protocols with Peer Collaborative Teachers (PCT's) and teachers with clear professional objectives, an action plan to achieve objectives, and expected outcomes. Measure: All Teachers Weekly, during Professional Learning and Professional Responsibilities, through June 28, 2019 Admin Team, BFSC, Department Chairs, Peer Collaborative Lead Teachers All Teachers Weekly Admin Team meetings and rotating cycles of observations in 6 week blocks, ending in June 2019 PCT's BFSC Teacher mentors Logs of mentor/ mentee meetings with objective, minutes and outcome. ● Implementation of night school Achieve Now Academy to support credit accumulation of students as well as All Teachers Weekly meetings, from September 25, Principal and Admin Team 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  implementation of Advisory program where students can self-assess their progress in core subject areas on a quarterly basis. 2018 through June 2019 Measure: Systematic measurement of credit accumulation of all students. ANA Supervising Teacher Teachers ANA guidelines as established and outlined by NYCDOE, monthly through June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent-Teacher Night, SLT, Parent Workshops and Open School Night, HS Newsletter, Principal's Newsletter Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Hiring three Peer Collaborative Teachers, teachers currently in the Mentoring program with work with new teachers, ensure that teachers are scheduled for common planning time, provide teachers with new CCLS materials (NYSTL funds). Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the strategies being implemented in support of Tenent 3.5 will have impacted the development and implementation of the assessment plan for the purpose of utilizing data to inform instruction, will have increased credit accumulation by at least 2%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress to Graduation Tracker. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed x N/A N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our school's Quality Review Report recommendations for the 2018-2019 SY, which were aligned with the six DTSDE Tenents, identified Tenant 5.2 as an area of celebration. In order for MAA's strategies and practices to align with the concepts in the highly effective column of Tenent 5, we should continue to support our students through our Achieve Now Academy. Our designation as a Priority School is due to the challenges of our subgroups meeting AYP in ELA and Math. This area of focus informed annual goal #2. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 2 As a result of our Achieve Now Academy PM school program which will target ENL and SPED students, by June 2019, there will be an increase in the number of students achieving required credit accumulation (a 5% increase in grade 9, a 4% increase in Grade 10, and an 3% increase in grade 11). 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Action Plan: Scheduled trainings throughout the 2018 - 2019 SY by Keith Howard of Mentoring USA and Leslie of the NYCDOE Restorative Justice Initiative for staff members to act as mentors and facilitators of restorative justice circles. Measure: Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Staff Students Start date: October 5, 2018 through June 28, 2019, with monthly data review Admin Teacher mentors Teachers Logged agendas and minutes from Mentoring USA and Restorative Justice trainings. Training of Dean’s staff and Support Services staff to input data on student behavior with targeted pilot group to measure student growth in positive community involvement. All students Measure: SWISS data on targeted students for positive behavior monitoring. Keeping binder of student records on a quarterly basis of all students involved in youth development programs to monitor areas of growth and areas of need. Attached would include intervention plan to address areas of need. Students Measure: Student achievement scores on a quarterly basis to measure areas of growth or need for those involved in all youth development programs. Start date: October 2, 2018, with monthly data review, through June 28, 2019 Admin Deans Teachers Start date: October 2, 2018, with monthly data review, through June 28, 2019 Program Facilitators Deans Teachers Guidance Counselors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Develop and implement student culture surveys to measure student feedback on areas school community must build upon, improve, or amend. Teachers Students Measure: Assessment of data from student culture surveys through Google Surveys. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Start date: October 2, 2018, with monthly data review, through June 28, 2019 Program Facilitators Deans Teachers Guidance Counselors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent-Teacher Conferences, Open School Night, Parent Workshops, SLT, Principal Newsletter, HS News Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Set aside funds for student incentives, purchase SWISS monitoring system, set aside funds for teachers who participate in after school PBIS sponsored events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students participating in the Achieve Now Academy will have met with support staff at least two times. By June 2019, students will have increased credit accumulation by at least 2%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress to Graduation Tracker. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. N/A 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. N/A 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's Quality Review Report recommendations from the 2016-2017 SY, which were aligned with the six DTSDE Tenents, identified Tenant 4.3 as a growth area. In order for MAA's strategies and practices to align with the concepts in the highly effective column of Tenent 4, we should engage teachers through collaborative teacher teams, in order to inform the planning process utilizing a variety of ways to engage in learning. Our designation as a Priority School is due to the challenges of our subgroups meeting AYP in ELA and Math. This area of focus informed annual goal #3. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 3: By June 2019, teachers will implement a cohesive assessment plan across core subjects for the purpose of utilizing data to inform curriculum adaptations, modifications, and instruction, resulting in a 3% increase (from 83% to 86%) in the number of teachers who are rated Effective or Highly Effective in Danielson Component 3D. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Train staff in developing, applying and assessing student outcomes from MY ACCESS/ DDC PORTAL/ DELTA MATH/ and/or other admin approved computer based standardized assessment to measure student growth or areas of need on a quarterly basis. Teachers Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Measure: Assessment Data from MY ACCESS/DDC Portal/ DELTA MATH and/or an admin approved standardized periodic assessment. ● Schedule weekly success team meetings to establish a targeted subject specific and grade appropriate instructional focus aligned to Literacy Plan. The achievement or further inquiry on this instructional focus will be measured using the standardized assessments and universal rubrics developed as per the Literacy Plan. Measure: Admin PCT's BFSC Teachers Start date October 2, 2018, weekly, through allotted PD and PL time, through June 26, 2019. Teacher Teams Start date October 2, 2018, weekly, through allotted PD and PL time, through June 26, 2019 Admin Special Education Coordinator Cohort Teams Success Teams Literacy Plan will act as metric to measure growth in literacy across all core subjects on select periodic assessments based on universally designed rubrics. ● PCT"S will develop targeted weekly PDs focused on the vertical alignment of all lesson/unit plans across subject areas. Student data on periodic assessments will inform steps to build upon, amend, or alter current formative and summative assessment so that they are aligned to specific common core standards. Admin Teachers Facilitator Measure: Agendas, minutes, and unit plan artifacts from our PCT'a PDs assessing Danielson Aligned and Common Core Aligned original Start date September 11 2018, weekly, through allotted PD and PL time, through June 26, 2019. Admin Teachers PCT's Facilitator 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  plans, alterations to plans, and corresponding student assessment data that shows evidence of growth. ● School wide use of backwards design when planning lessons, units, and designing curriculum. Admin Teachers PCT'SFacilitator Measure: Unit plan artifacts from PCT's PDs assessing Danielson Aligned and Common Core Aligned original plans, alterations to plans, and corresponding student assessment data that shows evidence of growth. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Admin Teachers PCT Facilitator Start date September 6, 2018, weekly, through allotted PD and PL time, through June How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent-Teacher Conferences, Open School Night, Parent Workshops, SLT, Principal Newsletter, HS News Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional Development, on all levels, as well as support from the support centers, will be utilized. The school will be benefiting from ongoing professional development provided by the support centers, both teacher and administrators to observe best practices. Professional Development from outside sources will also be utilized. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will demonstrate evidence of self-assessment with the implementation of rubrics in all classes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Domain chart, Advance , increase in student performance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed N/A X N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school's Quality Review Report recommendations from the 2016-2017 SY, which were aligned with the six DTSDE Tenents, identified Tenant 2.3 as a growth area. In order for MAA's strategies and practices to align with the concepts in the highly effective column of Tenent 2, the school should continue to support systems for programming for students and teachers , which will result in an increase in CUNY proficiency for students that are college and career ready in both Math and ELA. Our designation as a Priority School is due to the challenges of our subgroups meeting AYP in ELA and Math. This area of focus informed annual goal #4. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 4: As a result of targeted intervention and individualized instruction, by June 2019, there will be a 3% increase (from 23% to 26%) in the number of students who reach the CUNY proficiency level in both ELA and Math. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Regents preparation classes will be provided before the January and June regents. Teachers Measure: To be measured by student performance in ELA/Math regents landing above a 70%. ● The use of ANA night school to provide individualized instruction for struggling students in English and Mathematics to impact student performance on Regents. Measure: Student performance in ELA/Math regents scoring above 70%. Student transcript data reflecting an increase in credit accumulation. ● Systematic use of regents level questions on all formative assessments to develop understanding and application of regents based language. Admin Teachers Social Workers Guidance Counselor Teachers Measure: Student performance on Regents exams. ● Student/Parent/Teacher communication and student academic monitoring using “live” access Skedula. All Staff Measure: Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 7, 2018 and weekly, through June 26, 2019 October 2, 2018 and weekly through June 26, 2019. Admin Teachers Admin Teachers Social Workers Guidance Counselor October 2, 2018 and weekly through June 26, 2019. Admin Teachers September 7, 2018 and weekly through June 26, 2019. All Staff 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Anecdotal data logged into Skedula. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent-Teacher Conferences, Open School Night, Parent Workshops, SLT, Principal Newsletter, HS News Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Continue funding of Datacation, hold cycles of town hall meetings to go over Are You Green, monthly parent meetings to go over student progress. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be an increase in CUNY proficiency by 2% for students that are college and career ready in both ELA and Math. Progress reports, monitor parental participation, monitor of scholarship data/report every marking period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regent's invitations for January 2019 regents; student transcripts. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. X 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. N/A SOP(s) Addressed N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In accordance with the Chancellors School Pillars and Framework all schools should develop greater partnerships with families, students and communities. At Millennium, we plan to re-enforce and expand the systems that are in place at the school that provide students and families continual feedback and progress reporting and school wide level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 5: As a result of the expansion of parental outreach efforts and collection of feedback from families, by June 2019, attendance at parent workshops will increase 10% and attendance at parent conferences will increase 5%. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Start date: September 7, 2018, and daily through June 26, 2019. Start date: September 7, 2018, and monthly through June 26, 2019. All staff Admin Parent Coordinator SLT Parent Association Admin Team Parent Coordinator CBO Rep Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● Student/Parent/Teacher communication and student academic monitoring using “live” access Skedula All staff Measure: Teacher anecdotals logged into Skedula. ● Increase the number of parent functions by 10% by tying workshops to student celebration. Involve students in the invitation process for school events in increase attendance and participation. Parents Measure: Attendance rosters and excel data from school wide events. ● Work with guest speakers and community professionals to establish workshops that parents need – cooking, completing tax forms, etc. Measure: Community Based Organization Representatives Parents Start date: October 2, 2018, and monthly through June 26, 2019. Parent Coordinator data of RSVP for events and school messenger binder with proof of parent outreach. ● Create Google Survey for parents to complete regarding satisfaction of impact of school community at EACH school wide event. Parents Measure: Start date: October 2, 2018, monthly through June 2019. Admin Teachers Parent Coordinator SLT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Parent survey results. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Parent-Teacher Conferences, Open School Night, Parent Workshops, SLT, Principal Newsletter, HS News Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monthly parent workshops provided by Admin and Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, continue to fund the use of Skedula to communicate with parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Creation of parent survey will help monitor and see if strategies are working. Parent survey will be given twice a year. Monthly reviews of anecdotes on Skedula. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Monthly reviews of anecdotes on Skedula. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Teacher recommendations, citywide exams, Regents exam scores, Guidance Counselor recommendation, IEP’s Teacher recommendations, citywide exams, Regents exam scores, Guidance Counselor recommendation, IEP’s Teacher recommendations, citywide exams, Regents exam scores, Guidance Counselor recommendation, IEP’s Teacher recommendations, citywide exams, Regents exam scores, Guidance Counselor recommendation, IEP’s Pupil Personnel Team referrals, Guidance Counselor referrals, School Psychologist Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Extended day classes, targeted tutoring, tutoring for special needs, AIS lab for ELL students, Saturday school. Extended day classes, tutoring, targeted tutoring for special needs students, targeted students for Regents exam prep Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Support will be provided in additional classes, small groups When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) The majority of these services are provided after school but tutoring is available before, during and after school Support will be provided in additional classes, small groups and 1:1 tutoring The majority of these services are provided after school but tutoring is available before, during and after school Extended day classes, tutoring, targeted tutoring for special needs students, targeted students for Regents exam prep Support will be provided in additional classes, small groups and 1:1 tutoring The majority of these services are provided after school but tutoring is available before, during and after school Extended day classes, tutoring, targeted tutoring for special needs students, targeted students for Regents exam prep Support will be provided in additional classes, small groups and 1:1 tutoring The majority of these services are provided after school but tutoring is available before, during and after school Peer Mediation, Attendance Outreach, Respect for All Initiatives, and Many of these programs require 1:1 work with students. However, in some The majority of these support services are available throughout the school day. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) referrals, Deans referrals, Attendance Committee recommendations referrals to outside agencies, Career Visions. cases, group counseling is also available Career Visions is our primary after school program. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have 40 students in temporary housing. D=17, P=3, S=19, T=1 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services provided to our STH students: food, trips, counseling services, AIS, laundry services, supplies, retreats. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). We currently have 40 students in temporary housing. D=17, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Services provided to our students: food, trips, counseling services, AIS, laundry services, supplies, retreats. P=3, S=19, T=1 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 08X312 received an STH allocation of $5997.00. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Recruitment of HQT from DOE New Teacher Finder ● Support through new teacher mentoring program in compliance with DOE regulations ● Ongoing weekly professional learning as provided for by DOE -Use of Purposeful Learning Vendor to provide PD to teachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● School will implement a collaborative inquiry model that supports teachers’ professional learning and continuous improvement by completing collaborative inquiry cycles built around ● Modeling ● Collaborative planning ● Feedback/Tuning protocol -Differentiate PD based on teacher need and student data -Coaching and mentoring TDC -BFSC will provide instructional support to teachers and departments 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. PD Committee; Teacher Teams; MOSL, MyAccess, Assessment Calendar, Department meetings, Inquiry work 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41 Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal school allocation amounts) 332,031.00 Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal 16,979.00 65,000.00 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Federal Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local x x 11,000.00 2,725,647.00 x x x x x x x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A Part 4b Section 5B Part 4b Section 5D Part 4b Section 5E Part 4b x Section 5A Part 4b Section 5B Part 4b Section 5D Part 4b Section 5E Part 4b Section 5B Part 4b Section 5D Part 4b Section 5E Part 4b Section 5A Part 4b Section 5A Part 4b Section 5B Part 4b Section 5D Part 4b Section 5E Part 4b Section 5A Part 4b Section 5B Part 4b Section 5D Part 4b Section 5E Part 4b Section 5A Part 4b Section 5B Part 4b Section 5C Part 4b Section 5D Part 4b Section 5E PArt 4b 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Millennium Art Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Millennium Art Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46 School-Parent Compact (SPC)  Millenium Art Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), ; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: Millenium Art Academy This school is (check one): DBN: 08X312 conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: Students need experiential learning in order to fully develop additional language skills in the four major modalities of reading, writing, speaking, and listening. With the current Common Core Standards, it is critical that in school instruction be guided by student data, collaborative, and embedded in daily practice. Depending on the proficiency level of students will determine how many units of instruction per week. For example students who have been identified as newly entered- emerging will receive at minimum 2 units of study per week or 360 minutes. Students labeled transitioning- expanding will receive at minimum 1 unit of study per week or 180 mins. Finally, students labeled commanding will receive .5 units of study per week for an additional 2 years as per CR part 154. Thus, student learning should be supplemented with trips, visual, and kinesthetic learning tools, engaging texts as well as activities. Students also need a variety of high- quality instructional plans which include differentiated lessons that incorporate hands-on learning materials, engaging texts, and technology which inevitably support our students with building the language and knowledge they need to be successful. The goal is to ultimately give students not only language they need to be successful in their new culture but also provide them with social and cultural context that grounds them in real world experiences so that they can continuously achieve academic success. Subgroups and grade levels: The grade levels range from 9-12th graders Schedule and duration: The program will last from September 5th 2018-June 26th 2019 of the 2018/19 academic year. Language of Instruction: Primarily English with some Spanish and Arabic translations. Number and types of certified teachers: 1 teacher dually certified in ELA and ESOL and 1 teacher certified in ESOL Types of materials: Laptops, iPads, ipad applications, textbooks, vocabulary workbooks, novels, various art supplies such as paint, pencils, drawing pads, oil pastels, photography supplies, audio/visual CD-ROMS and MP3's, and various computer programs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Teachers need to be prepared to infuse art, literacy, and technology across all content areas in order to promote student achievement through using high-quality instructional plans and materials and engaging students through a variety of learning styles. Teachers need to be familiar with our ELL population and ELLs with IEPs with and strategies for helping them achieve short term and long term academic goals. Teachers to receive training: In accordance with new CR-154 regulations all staff will receive training related to ELL population. Schedule and duration: The program will last throughout the 2018-2019 and 2019-2020 academic school year. Topic to be covered: Assessment, art infusion, hallmarks of advanced literacy, students data, reading, writing, speaking, and listening, incorporating Common Core Standards, and a variety of other topics which involve ELL instruction and support. Name of provider: NEST, Museum of Modern Art, Rubin Museum, Lincoln Center, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Museum of Natural History, Office of English Language Learners, UFT, TESOL International and various other DOE professional development programs. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Parents need to be involved in their child’s education. Parent outreach must be top priority for all teachers and staff. Parents and/or guardians of newly arrived parents whom do not speak English will be communicated with on a regular basis using DOE translation services of either in-person translators or over-the-phone interpretation. Additional communication attempts will be embedded into outreach to raise parent involvement and include them in all aspects of student learning. Schedule and duration: The program will last throughout the 2018-2019 academic school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Topics to be covered: What is ENL, how do we support students at home, how do we develop a community with clear and manageable lines of communication, how do we bridge cross-cultural gaps that make transitioning to a new country less-overwhelming and more manageable. Name of Provider: ENL Coordinator, and various other programs to be determined. How parents will be notified of activities: Parents will be called ,texted, and emailed, they will also be notified via Skedula, and letters will be mailed and backpacked home. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Millennium Art Academy Borough Bronx School Number 312 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Herman Guy Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Dana Carroll Teacher/Subject Area N/A Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Brendan Connolly Coach N/A School Counselor Carmen Tieso Parent Enid Martinez Parent Coordinator Glenda Melendez Field Support Center Staff Member Kristy De La Cruz Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 450 Total number of ELLs 40 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.89% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 4 0 2 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment tools MAA uses to assess the early literacy skills for our ELLs are test scores derived from NYSITELL, NYESLAT, summative and formative teacher made assessments based on current Common Core Standards and regents scores. Additionally, MAA assesses the early literacy skills gathered from push-in classes that evaluate student performance, reports cards and progress reports. MAA also administered the Pearson Group Reading Assessment and Diagnostic Evaluation, read 180, and MOSL exams given to students within the first month of school. Formative and summative assessments are built into every content area at MAA. As formative and summative data is 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  collected, teachers implement data in a way that informs their teaching to better meet the educational needs of our ELLs. This is a process that is performed by every teacher in every class. Teachers informally check for understanding using exit tickets, notebook checks, and in-class checks for student understanding. Formally, teachers have quizzes and tests every week built into their curriculum to check for student growth. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The insights this data provides influences literacy based program design across content areas, program placement, proactive grouping, and in-class accommodations/modifications to instruction for the students to aid their in-class performance. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment, Core subject baseline assessments. Once data is collected content teachers together with ELL coordinator collaborate to discuss specific students and their needs. Adjustments to curriculum are made accordingly. Areas of need for students at MAA are reading and writing. Subsequently, teachers have implemented a literacy plan which will address this need within our ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The collection of early literacy skills data has led MAA to data driven actions plans for each one of our students which includes data driven instruction geared toward student proficiency levels, purposeful grouping, modified and differentiated instruction, translation when applicable and peer tutoring. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. 2017 data analysis of NYSELAT, ELA and Math Common Core Regents results accessed through ATS and ELL Data Analysis Tool, which is evaluated and informs our ELL programs to make data driven instructional decisions 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool) which supports planning and informs instruction. Inquiry protocols such as baseline assessments , measures of student learning in order to obtain a reference point to which teachers can base their instruction. Collaborative Planning which implements data gathered from assessments from teachers within the classroom to integrate collaboratively in both ENL standalone and content push-in. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. MAA implements a Small Group ELL Instructional Program/Freestanding, stand alone model ENL program as well as push-in/integrated ENL model from 9th -12th grade in ELA content classes. Students are organized by proficiency 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  level (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding) and receive ENL push-in services in ELA classes. The primary goal of our ELL program is to foster full English Proficiency in a supportive risk-free least restrictive environment (LRE) classroom environment as well as to: Expand literacy and academic language, and provide students with skills that will allow them to perform at city and state grade level across content areas. MAA programs ENL to meet the learning needs of each student. ENL students are programmed into 5-day a week heterogeneous integration classes taught by the content instructors with push-in instruction from the ENL teacher. Also, all students from entering-transitioning proficiencies are programmed for a 5 day a week ELL stand-alone class with the ENL instructor. The purpose of this class is to support mainstream content area classes. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL coordinator (who is also the ENL instructor) works diligently to ensure that all students are receiving the required number of minutes. Throughout the year, she works with the guidance counselors and programming coordinators to make sure that all ENL students are being appropriately served. With the addition of the resource room style classes for ENL students, many students are actually receiving more than the minimum ENL instructional time, without any negative affect on their credit accumulation. Free-standing ENL programs are offered in a Block Schedule. Beginner/Entering ELL’s receive 540 minutes a week. 180 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Low intermediate/emerging ELLs receive 360 minutes of service a week, 90 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. Intermediate/ transitioning ELLs receive a total of 180 minutes total, with 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area instruction. Advanced/ expanding ELLs Receive 180 integrated ENL/ELA minutes per week. Finally Proficient/commanding ELLs receive 90 integrated ENL/ELA minutes a week. Students are grouped in classes based on proficiency levels. Students are graded individually based on New York State Standards in conjunction with a teacher designed grading scale. a. The goal of our ENL program is to foster full English proficiency in a supportive risk-free environment. Both the English Language Arts (“ELA”) and ENL Teachers that work with ELL students are fully certified. In order to help students progress, we use the following practices: • Collaborative Planning and/or Conferencing with Content Area Teachers • Utilization of different strategies: Scaffolding, Modeling, Schema Building, Contextualization, Text Representation and Meta cognition. • Assisting students during work periods, conferencing with students in and out of class and informal assessments • Communication and collaboration with parents • Creating goals for students in which they monitor their progress in each of their course 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At MAA, ENL students are programmed to take mainstream English-language content area classes with integration from the ENL teacher. Students also receive support in the content areas during their ENL standalone instruction class. Content area teachers also receive professional development from the ENL coordinator in order to learn delivery approaches and instructional strategies that are beneficial to ENL students. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  MAA ensures that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language throughout the year given their proficiency levels. Students who are labeled entering will be given content-area exams in the home language. As students’ proficiency levels advance content-area exams will be modified to have both English and their home language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students with Interrupted Formal Education (“SIFE”) are placed into ENL programs in accordance with most recent NYISTELL or Spanish LAB results or NYSESLAT Results. In addition to ENL, students have access to support services that help transition into high school (i.e. Academic Intervention Services or Counseling). Depending on their proficiency levels SIFE ELLs are given content instruction in their home language. Additionally, depending on proficiencies classwork will be given to students in their home language and English. Students are also provided with textbooks that subtitle English in their home language. Students are provided with one-on-one instruction, peer-mediation, purposeful grouping, dual language dictionaries, and in some cases translation services. As their proficiency advances the modification will become more rigorous. Newcomer ELLs receive 540 minutes of ENL services per week with 180 minutes of integrated instruction across content areas and 180 minutes of standalone instruction. Instruction for newcomer ELLs is aligned with New York State ELA and ENL Standards. Students are provided instruction in reading, speaking and writing from the certified ENL teacher. To incorporate New York State ELA content, the ENL teacher meets with ELA teachers in a Professional Learning Community and for common planning three days a week. Depending on their proficiency levels ELLs are given content instruction in their home language. Additionally, depending on proficiencies classwork will be given to students in their home language and English. Students are also provided with textbooks that subtitle English in their home language. Students are provided with one-on-one instruction, peer-mediation, purposeful grouping, dual language dictionaries, and in some cases translation services. As their proficiency advances the modification will become more rigorous. Developing ELLs receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Students are placed in a 90 minute stand alone class that meets daily in a pull-out setting. Students are programmed for small group instruction in are placed in homogenous groupings based on proficiency level. Instruction for ELLs is aligned with New York State ELA and ENL Standards. Depending on their proficiency levels ELLs are given content instruction in their home language. Additionally, depending on proficiencies classwork will be given to students in their home language and English. Students are also provided with textbooks that subtitle English in their home language. Students are provided with one-on-one instruction, peer-mediation, purposeful grouping, dual language dictionaries, and in some cases translation services. As their proficiency advances the modification will become more rigorous. Long Term ELLs (6+ years) receive 180 minutes of ENL of integrated services per week in ENL/ELA content areas. Instruction is delivered Students are placed into heterogeneous groups based on proficiency level. Depending on their proficiency levels ELLs are given content instruction in their home language. Additionally, depending on proficiencies classwork will be given to students in their home language and English. Students are also provided with textbooks that subtitle English in their home language. Students are provided with one-on-one instruction, peer-mediation, purposeful grouping, dual language dictionaries, and in some cases translation services. As their proficiency advances the modification will become more rigorous. Former ELL Students receiving ENL services are provided with 90 minute integrated instruction. Students are provided equal access to all elective courses. Additionally, students are additionally encouraged to participate in school extracurricular activities, including sports teams and clubs. Former ELL's are provided with accommodations per parental and principal requests. In addition all appropriate testing modifications are allotted to former ELLs. Depending on their proficiency levels ELLs are given content instruction in their home language. Additionally, depending on proficiencies classwork will be given to students in their home language and English. Students are also provided with textbooks that subtitle English in their home language. Students are provided with one-on-one instruction, peer-mediation, purposeful grouping, dual language dictionaries, and in some cases translation services. As their proficiency advances the modification will become more rigorous.454545554 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some instructional strategies and grade-level materials that the teachers of ELL-SWD use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate their English language development are literary based ELA, math, science, and history texts that differ for each grade. All texts used for instruction are chosen by experienced teachers of ELL-SWDs. The criteria for chosen texts are based on the specific needs of the students, lexile levels, and rigor. Specifically,the ELA and LPT team currently utilizes “Collections Curriculum” that is differentiated for ELL-SWDs and “Vocabulary Toolkit” by Dr. Kate Kinsella both are designed and differentiated for grades 9-12. The material is subtitled and chunked for an easier understanding for any ELL-SWDs. The Math and Science teams design their own curriculum based on the Common Core Standards and also align to the expectations of the regents exams. Any materials distributed to ELL-SWDs are reviewed by the ENL coordinator, to ensure that appropriate differentiation has been provided. MAA also provides mandated C-6 programming during the day, in which students receive additional help in various content areas from the ENL teacher, Dana Carroll and other content area teachers. Additionally, after school homework help is provided daily. In addition to in class instruction, MAA strives to educate students outside of the classroom with monthly field trips that provide deeper understanding with hands on experiences across content-areas. Any instruction that requires students to watch videos are subtitled in their home language. All ELLs with disabilities are given strategically planned programs based on their IEP and their test scores, as well as teacher recommendations. All content teachers and CTT teachers give appropriate modifications for ELL-SWDs based on the data recorded on their IEPs. The LPT team, special education team, and programmer of MAA collaborate on a weekly basis to ensure that ELL-SWDs are receiving meaningful and rigorous instructions within their appropriate programs. Some of the technology used to support ELLs, are translation services, which provide on-the-spot translation through tablet apps and Reading Plus which is an interactive computer program, for grades 9-12 appropriate for all proficiencies, which helps to develop their speaking, reading, listening, and writing skills, in addition to various other training programs used to support our ELLs across all content areas. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL instructor works closely with the IEP coordinator to determine the best program choices for students with special needs. She implements special strategies that will benefit IEP students. All IEP students receive support through the Special Education department. The LPT team and Special education department review the IEPs for any ELL-SWD. In order to place a student in an ICT class both teams collaborate to adhere to the state mandates and specialized instruction recorded on the students IEP in order to provide the student with specialized instruction within the least restrictive environment. After reviewing the students IEP the ELL coordinator works to change the schedule of the student as needed. The students also receive additional C-6 support, after-school help, and Saturday Academy classes when such interventions are beneficial to the students. If the student needs additional support MAA provides flexible programming, through inclusion classes with least restrictive environment or LRE to maximize time spent with ELL-SWDs and non-disabled peers. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In order for MAA to provide ELLs with rigorous, culturally responsive instruction we implement targeted intervention programs across content areas. The targeted intervention for ELLs within each classroom is linguistically appropriate and culturally relevant Instruction in addition to being in accordance with State laws regarding ENL academic programming. Across each content area evaluation of assessment data is taken into account, students’ level of language proficiency. Across all of the content-areas ELA, math, science, and history, each provide interventions and early intervention programs through a tiered system of instructional support, which varies in instructional support and adheres to the common core standards curriculum delivered at MAA. Additionally the intervention programs are based on the changing needs of the students. The levels of intervention and instruction fluctuate in rigor as students’ proficiency improve. The targeted interventions used by the ELA, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  math, social studies, and science teachers is the 3 tiered system. Tier 1 intervention incorporates high quality evidence-based instruction for all ELLs in their home language and English depending on their proficiencies. Tier 2 uses small group intervention for ELLs in their home language and in English depending on their proficiencies who did not respond to the interventions in tier 1. Tier 3 intervention programs are given to ELLs who responded poorly in both tier 1 and tier 2 interventions. this includes intense, individualized instruction for ELLs in their home language and in English depending on their proficiencies. Additionally, the majority of ENL students at Millennium Art Academy choose to take their Regents Examinations in English, as their classes are in English. In fact, when students have chosen to take a test in their home language in the past, they have actually fared worse than when they choose to take the test in English. Therefore, comparing test scores in English versus home language doesn’t really make sense for the population. The data shows that the passing rate is better for Science and Math, which have less emphasis on reading and writing. ELL students struggle most with the Comprehensive English, the US History, and the Global Regents Exams. The school is working to provide ample opportunities for the students to receive extra help in these content areas to help them pass the exams. Students are also given time during their ungraded resource room to complete labs for science, quizzes in history, essays and packets for ELA, and math worksheets. At this time students are also free to get extra help from any of their content teachers. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? One new program being considered is an after-school ELA Regents preparation class that would be specifically for ELL students. Data from the NYSESLAT revealed that many of our ELLs struggle the most in the area of writing. The ELA regents prep would to support our ELLs’ English development and better prepare them for the challenges of the regents examination. Also, MAA is working with other schools on the campus to expand supplementary service offerings for ELLs. Additionally, another program that is being considered is an after-school program which focuses on developing ELLs speaking skills. In order to gain proficiency in writing, reading, and listening, encouraging them to speak more would lower their affective filter and thereby advance their proficiencies in the other modalities. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are informed of and encouraged to join any and all school programs. Many participate in clubs such as student council, photography club, Salud! ( a health club designed to promote healthier lifestyles within students), dance and sports teams (both intramural and PSAL). MAA has after school and supplemental academic services specifically for ELL students, such as academic support in their content classes, and regents support classes. ELLs participate in mainstream supplemental services when that is appropriate. For example Saturdays at MAA will now host community service opportunities which will provide ELLs with the opportunity for guided and integrated community outreach. ELLs have been encouraged and personally invited by multiple teachers and staff members to become active members of the MAA community. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school purchases bilingual resources to assist students in their content area classes. The ENL coordinator also uses the following programs: - Power Up Reading for special needs and long term ELLs (includes a technological component). - Keys to Learning for Newcomer ELLs (includes a technological component). - Words Their Way for English Language Learners for all ELLs. - Various videos, songs, and multimedia devices such as iPads, digital recorders and cameras are used for experiential learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Spanish is offered as an elective for all students at our high school. Spanish instruction is offered for levels 1-6. Instruction is provided by a native Spanish speaker who is also fluent in English 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL coordinator works hard to ensure that all instructional services and resources are age- and grade-appropriate for ELLs. Even when a student is an absolute "beginner" or newly entered in terms of English language proficiency, material is never “dumbed-down,” but instead is modified so that all students can have access to the same level of intellectual rigor. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? N/A 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Every summer, the ENL coordinator contacts the families of newly-enrolled ELL students to introduce herself and discuss the ENL program at MAA. The families are invited to a new student information session, where they receive information about the school and are introduced to current students. Furthermore, the ENL coordinator alerts families to summer programs for ENL students and gives parents suggestions about what they can do to ensure that their children keep learning over the summer. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time, the only language class offered to students at MAA is Spanish. However, the school is working to build capacity in order to offer more language classes. When students express interest in other languages, the ENL coordinator and guidance counselors help them look for information about outside language programs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL coordinator (who is also the sole instructor of ENL) is able to attend professional development workshops and trainings throughout the year. She has attended PDs on supporting ELLs with on-demand writing for ELA regents. She has attended PD at Fordham University “planning professional Development for all teachers responsive to the needs of ELLs” and the 2016 NYS English Language Learner Parent Conference. Each year, she plans to continue to attend all Professional Development offerings that will assist her own development as coordinator and instructor, and also any that will better her ability to assist content area teachers in their instruction of ELLs. Every Monday after a PD she turnkeys the information to content area teachers in order to aid them in their instruction as well. In order to adhere to the new CR part 154 regulations Administrators and teachers will attend 15% of PD’s which focus on being responsive to the needs of ELLs. In addition school based professional development is offered at MAA every Monday, except holidays during the school year from 2:30-4:45. Administration, teachers and support personnel deliver professional development on various topics. All MAA staff members receive PD during faculty conferences on site and specific domain of teaching off site as well. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL coordinator (who is also the sole instructor of ENL) is able to attend professional development workshops and trainings throughout the year. For the SY she has attended PDs on supporting ELLs with on-demand writing for ELA regents. She attended a PD at Fordham University “planning professional Development for all teachers responsive to the needs of ELLs” and the 2016 NYS English Language Learner Parent Conference. These PDs provide support the ENL coordinator as she develops her common-core aligned curriculum in order to successfully prepare her ELLs for the rigorous demands of the NYS regents examinations. After any PD the ELL coordinator meets with content teachers on a weekly basis and administers an ELL PD with materials to assist teachers with ELLs in content classrooms. In order to adhere to the new CR part 154 regulations Administrators and teachers will attend 15% of total hours and 50% of total hours for ENL teachers receive ELL specific Professional development which focus on supporting the needs of ELLs and supporting teachers in delivering Common-Core aligned instruction. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to the parent orientation and parent teacher conferences MAA meets with the parents of ELLS quarterly to discuss the progression of the student, goals of the ENL program, language development progress across content areas. All meetings have a translator if required. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are involved at MAA in a number of different ways. Throughout the course of the year, parents are invited,in their preferred language, to a number of trainings to learn about school systems. The school has an active PTA and parents also serve on the SLT. Every month, the bilingual Parent Coordinator sends home a school newsletter in the parents preferred language, and parents are always invited to school events through both mail and phone calls. Translation is always provided, if needed. ELL parents are included in all of these involvement strategies, and the ENL coordinator, with assistance from a translator, also calls parents personally to invite them to school events, or to inform them of their children’s progress Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The school partners with community organizations such as Lincoln Center, ASPIRA, El Museo del Barrio, and nursing homes parents of ELLs are always extended invitations in their preferred language to watch their child, or participate in an appropriate manner. When these organizations hold sessions for parents, such as plays, opportunities to volunteer, and accompany the school on an out of school field trip, the bilingual parent coordinator or the ENL coordinator informs the parent through mail and phone calls in their preferred language. The ENL coordinator and Parent Coordinator also inform parents when other parent events occur through other organizations, such as the Office of English Language Learners. Translation services are available through the parent coordinator. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  2018-19 SCEP-FL 64 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Herman Guy, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Millennium Art Academy School DBN: 08X312 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Herman Guy Title Principal Brendan Connolly Assistant Principal Glenda Melendez Parent Coordinator Dana Carroll ENL/Bilingual Teacher Enid Martinez Parent Lisette Castillo/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Jenna Ciaccio/SS Teacher/Subject Area Dana Carroll Lisette Castillo Coach Coach Jennifer Carchietta School Counselor Carron Staple Kristy De La Cruz N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Kristy De La Cruz Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08x312 School Name: Millennium Art Academy Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Dana Carroll ENL Coordinator YES Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. HLIS Survey and other surveys help parents communicate their language preference and support school's to proactively garner feedback. RCPL and RAPL Blue card has a language preference portion 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali/ Bengla English French Niger-Congo Spanish Tamil Vietnamese Unknown 1 3 4 307 3 1 124 1 1 2 na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na na 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Letters from Principal as necessary Event Letters Monthly, as necessary IEP's As necessary Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School staff, Google translate, T&I. We use DOE Intranet template for covered languages. School staff, Google translate, T&I. We use DOE Intranet template for covered languages. School staff, Google translate, T&I. We use DOE Intranet template for covered languages. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent teacher conferences Sept/Nov/Mar/May School Events As necessary IEP meetings as necessary interpretation service(s)? Bi-lingual school personnel, Google translate Bi-lingual school personnel, Google translate Bi-lingual school personnel, Google translate 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Language proficient school based staff Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All relevant information will be presented by the LAC during school PD in September. All staff have been trained to use IO Insights translation features for all communication Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Multilingual Welcome Poster Language ID Guide 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Parent Guide to Language Access "I speak..." Card Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Utilized a language preference and service survey through Google translate All teachers have been trained in using Google translate for all written, verbal and textual communication The school uses IO Insights translation tools for all communication 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70 
