2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 12X316 School Name: KAPPA III Principal: JEAN COLON 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information KAPPA III 321200010316 6,7,8 School Number (DBN): 12X316 2055 Mapes Avenue Bronx, New York 10460 718-561-3580 718-561-3719 Phone Number: Leia McKinley Fax: Jcolon8@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Jean E Colon Patsy Manganelli Paulette Lyn Nicole Vairo Ms. TaishaHerrera N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road Bronx, New York 10460 Jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-2310 Phone Number: 718-542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Ave.Bx,New York 10462/ 1 Fordham Plaza Bx, NY 10458 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov 718-828-7776 / 718-741-8895 718-828-6280 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jean Colon Patsy Manganelli Paulette Lyn Rhea Farrell TaishaHerrera Ty Diaz Joy Buddington Christine Barnes Nicole Vairo EnllyPaulino *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ School Rep Member/School Rep 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  ZenaidaEscamella SherominieAwatar Randy Subramany Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ School Rep Member/ Parent Rep Member/ Parent Rep Member/ Parent Rep Member/ Parent Rep Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The mission of KAPPA III is to foster a nurturing environment that supports, challenges and raises expectations of our adolescent learners. We provide rigorous, accelerated, academic programs that promotes inquisitive minds and creative learners. We empower our students to become critical thinkers and high achievers. KAPPA III students attend high performing public and private high schools, graduate from top universities, and take their place as one of America’s next generation of civic leaders. At KAPPA III we create an environment where every student learns that hard work will pay off. Students learn that while the climb may be difficult, every student can reach the summit. All programming is aligned with our school’s vision to engage, empower and inspire our students to be prepared for success in the 21st Century. The entire team at KAPPA III, teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals, support staff, and families, continue to aim every day to live up to our school mission and provide high academic expectations and support for all students. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. KAPPA III is a multicultural middle school located in one of the lowest socioeconomic sections of the Bronx, NY. We provide a rigorous, accelerated academic program that prepares students for admission into independent boarding, private day and specialized high schools. Rigorous instruction is evidenced by the academic achievement of our students as noted in the school mission, regents scores and student state score improvement. In grade 8, we offer an honors class for students taking a Regents math course. There are also classes in every grade for students on grade level, as well as students who need a 12:1 or 12:1:1 special education classroom. We currently have one Integrated Co-Teaching class (ICT) on every grade level. Our vision is that students learn best through student-centered instruction that is rigorous and focuses on students being active thinkers and reflective problem solvers across all content areas. Teachers incorporate engaging activities that include authentic high level discussions to deepen student learning and understanding. Scholars engage in learning that is personally meaningful, socially responsible and academically rigorous. The KAPPA III community is committed to equity and excellence for all as we develop lifelong learners. KAPPA III values a safe and nurturing learning environment for children that is characterized by an appreciation for the culture, achievements, accomplishments, challenges and struggles of all our students. We continue to focus on the whole child to inspire each student’s personal passions for a lifetime of learning. We are committed to creating a learning environment where students are open to new ideas and challenge themselves to be lifelong thinkers. An essential feature of KAPPA III is our Leadership Program. At KAPPA III, we engage our students with a dynamic learning experience that supports academic success and social/emotional growth. We have a deep and abiding respect for individuals and their learning. We foster innovation, initiative, leadership, creativity and respect for diversity. Our students participate in a variety of programs to promote effective learning through leadership and team building activities. This year, KAPPA III will implement the Leader in Me program for our incoming grade six students. This program teaches 21st century leadership and life skills to students and creates a culture of student empowerment based on the idea that every child can be a leader. Our philosophy at KAPPA III is to create and sustain a college-going culture to ensure all students have the knowledge of post secondary education. KAPPA III will participate in the College Access for All initiative, which is geared towards 7th grade students. Students and parents will receive workshops around high school, college and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  career success. Students will visit several college campuses serving as a reminder that college is an attainable goal and they should strive for greatness. At KAPPA III, School pride is evident through a positive school culture. Students show pride daily, by singing the KAPPA III song, KAPPA pledge and the KAPPA III chant with respect daily, during morning routines and at all assemblies. As part of it’s commitment to the community, KAPPA III participates in several charity drives. We encourage our students to practice philanthropy. The students raise funds and donate them to the following charities: American Cancer Society, Lupus and Alzheimer foundation. We have a school-wide Positive Behavior Incentive Program in our school to promote KAPPA III Essential features and three C’s (Character, Courage and Character). All of our students are given an opportunity to be curious and creative learners that achieve high expectations in a caring and supportive environment. Our students celebrate diversity, leadership and contribute to their community. Programs such as: Leader In Me, Challenge day, Camp Becket, Camp Ramapo, College and Career readiness, allows students to gain confidence and reach their potential skills. Other strategic partnerships KAPPA has initiated and leveraged for the 2018-2019 school-year include: , National Training Network, Bronx Zoo initiative for 7th grade and Urban Advantage to support Common Core aligned planning and instruction. Our School Wide Goals will continue to focus on questioning and discussion to increase the level of student engagement, across all content classrooms. A Generation Ready Literacy consultant will work to support ELA teachers in creating a true readers / writer's workshop to engage students at all levels with the Common Core Reading / Writing standards. Our Generation Ready Consultant will work with Social Studies and Science teachers in planning and executing quality rigorous instruction for all students. A National Training Network Consultant will support our math department as we aim to challenge our mathematicians to be inquisitive thinkers and problem solvers. Goldman Soar will support rigorous instruction in all ICT classrooms with an emphasis on planning to ensure both teachers are partnering at full capacity. Our science teachers will continue to work with Urban Advantage in inquiry based planning and instruction. To help develop our scholars creativity, will will continue to work with Arts Matter to immerse students in theater instruction 3 days per week; and Inside Broadway to expose them to the backstage of Broadway- each grade will become experts in one aspect of production (lighting, costumes, set design, etc.) and come together for a full tour and sharing of expertise. Our Social Studies Curriculum for 7th and 8th grade students include an engaging introduction into the Courts System. For the past three years, our students had the opportunity to explore the judicial system through the Thurgood Marshall, Junior Mock Trial Competition. The Mock Trial program provides our students with a positive experience in the judicial system. Our students learn about the courtroom skills that are necessary to prepare for various components of a trial. All grades will follow the Teacher College Reading and writing project curricula. Students will participate in book clubs and extensive Non-Fiction research. We strive to build a bridge between reading and writing development to enhance our student’s enjoyment, as well as, increase confidence in their own growth in these areas. Teacher collaboration is evident by the voluntary participation in a multitude of clubs. In addition, teachers participate in administration meetings weekly, to discuss school policy and procedures. On-going professional 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  development is (evident). Every Monday is dedicated to professional development in which teachers share effective practices through teacher designed workshops. Using the distributed leadership model, lead teachers work at grade and content level under the administration supervision analyzing student achievement and academic data to inform instruction in curricular design, unit planning, and lesson planning. Teachers, administrators and counselor maintain an open communication via digital documentation system: Pupil Path and Class Dojo. Parents and students are able to communicate with teachers through this system. Students and parents are able to monitor student progress on a daily basis. The school chronicle is disseminated every Monday to all students and emailed to parents, to maintain an open communication. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We currently have 397 scholars coming from diverse populations. The demographics of our school are 1% Asian Pacific, 32% Black, 66% Hispanic, 1% White. Many of the students in our school receive free lunch making up 98% of the school population. We have a 10% population of English Language Learners and 19 % of our student population has Individual Education Plans (IEP’s) and receive special education services. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Framework for Great Schools, Element- Rigorous Instruction, means that instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. The growth on the state ELA exam from June 2018- June 2019 is directly connected to the rigorous and inclusive instruction provided to all of our students during the regular ELA literacy blocks as well as the RTI program school-wide program. Based on data analysis from the State Assessments and NYSELAT, our grade 6-8 students demonstrate a need for support in the areas of ELA vocabulary and academic language development. In math, the focus must be to improve planning and support for complex mathematical problem solving by understanding vocabulary. These goals are specific to our school population of learners but also to our ELL students who have shown declines in achieving levels of proficiency on ELA state exams that were mostly attributed to questions that focus on understanding complex text, language and math problem solving skills. With these needs in mind, our Instructional Focus and Professional Learning Plan is to strengthen instruction and curriculum by emphasizing the development of academic vocabulary so that students are able to articulate their thinking in academic discussions. We will emphasize this across all contents using Word Generation which emphasizes learning goals such as: using academic language, developing an argument, reasoning analytically, reading to find evidence and discussing various perspectives. In mathematics, we will emphasize problem based lessons so that students are able to justify varied pathways to solve problems. In Social Studies and Science, students will employ academic vocabulary to discuss controversial topics. In ELA Word Generation is creating opportunities for students to develop their academic language by reading and deepening their understanding of current issues. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X316 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 385 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 38 35 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 12 12 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 88.3% % Reduced Lunch 8.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 69.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.09 4% 32% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 40 41 93.3% 2.9% 26.2% 27.0% 1.8% 0.8% 0 12% 5.3 22.9% 35% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Yes No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element?  Indicate the data trends, source and year. In response to the Framework for Great Schools-Rigorous Instruction as well as feedback from our latest Performance Review, we have decided to review and strengthen our parent and community engagement. By increasing family events, we will continue to foster strong family/community relationships that will build greater support and capacity in order to strengthen both the academic and social emotional needs of our students.  We strive to ensure that individual students and particular sub-groups make progress from year to year. A review of our ELA and Math state scores and student performance on the MOSL assessments, indicated that we need to focus our instructional program to support student development on word meaning. Specifically, provide opportunities for students to read words and establish a mathematical context, using persuasive writing, argumentative writing and using evidence to support claims.  After conducting an analysis of the documentation resulting from the Looking at Student Work ongoing collaborative inquiry using the New Teacher Mentor protocols, it was determined that teachers focused on the areas that needed to be modeled more explicitly for students that did not meet benchmarks. We need to ensure rigorous instruction is being provided for students at all levels. Feedback from our Principal Performance Review and Instructional Rounds indicated that we need to focus on developing cognitively challenging activities that support student progress in meeting and exceeding standards.  2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Specifically, we need to focus on discussion / questioning techniques, and creating opportunities for student to deepen their understanding of the content. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, KAPPA III will implement school-wide Word Generation as evident by all classrooms completing word generation activities on a daily basis and sharing student work during our weekly inquiry meetings. We will use rubrics to measure student progress on word generation culminating writing pieces. This will increase the level of vocabulary proficiency, academic discussions and conceptual understanding as our students think, explain, justify and reflect in all content areas. As a result, by June 2019, student performance among our lowest third will increase by 5% on the NYS ELA and Math Assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All students will receive Word Generation instruction four times a week to enhance vocabulary skills. Tier 2 academic vocabulary will be shared and emphasized in each class: In mathematics, we will emphasize problem based lessons so that students are able to justify varied pathways to solve problems, In Social Studies and Science students will employ academic vocabulary to discuss controversial topics. In ELA Word Generation is creating opportunities for students to develop their academic language by reading and deepening their understanding of current issues. All students in grades 6, 7 and 8 September 2018-June 2019 Teachers will learn strategies for students who need additional support to access the Word Generation material (SWD, STH, overage, etc.) from our Generation Ready and National Training Network coach through professional development. All teachers September 2018-March 2019 Inquiry Meetings will occur regularly to analyze data and monitor student progress. This will ensure a common language, expectations, and instruction with the use of evidence across grades and discipline through professional collaboration. All teachers September 2018-June 2019 During weekly parent outreach staff will meet with families to discuss at risk students, and create collaborative action plan for success. All Staff, students and families October 2018- June 2019 Staff will communicate with families and provide information regarding instruction and upcoming events. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, National Training Network Consultant, Generation Ready Consultant, TIF Lead teachers, Mentor and data specialist. Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, National Training Network Consultant, Generation Ready Consultant, TIF Lead teachers, Mentor and data specialist. Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, National Training Network Consultant,, Generation Ready Consultant, TIF Lead teachers, Mentor and data specialist. Assistant Principals, Literacy Coach, Math Coach, National Training Network Consultant,, Generation Ready Consultant, TIF Lead teachers, Mentor and data specialist., 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parent Coordinator and Guidance Counselor. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage families through inviting them to participate in Curriculum Night, curriculum showcases, workshops on Common Core Assessments, Parent-Teacher Conferences, Tuesday Family Engagement Sessions, Skedula and Weekly Chronicle. Teachers will work to provide parent nights to inform them of Word Generation and the importance of academic language acquisition for their students. Teachers will invite parents into their classrooms to see Word Generation in action throughout the year so they understand what is taking place in the classroom and can better support at home. Teachers will hold these classroom visits throughout the year. All teachers will be involved in this process. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monies allocated as part of the NYCDOE will be used to support the success of the program initiatives and reduce teacher student ratio: after-school programs, teacher per session, per diem, teacher supplies, student materials and professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will be using student work from their Word Generation Essay Sheet to track growth in student writing and ability to use their target words each week. We will also be tracking observational feedback by administration during Word Generation periods. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, we will review progress towards meeting the annual goal to ensure a one percent growth utilizing our I-Ready benchmark assessment and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. X 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? KAPPA III is characterized by a culture that values academic achievement and prioritizes support for students during transitional adolescent years. To develop a sense of self-awareness and reflection, we are guiding our students to become more independent and responsible for their learning. Based on the most recent school Quality Snapshot, 90% agreed that they feel safe in their learning environment. However, 63% of the students agreed that most students at their school treat each other with respect. Our strengths include, but it is not limited to: Academic, social and emotional support that creates safe learning environments for taking intellectual risks. Students participate in class and seek out academic support when needed. High attendance rates demonstrate the importance students and families place on education. Emphasis on grade level is placed on development of skills that are needed for success in high school, college and beyond. We have a strong PBIS system and behavior tracking sheet that is utilized to promote positive school culture. Needs: KAPPA III will implement a more rigorous social emotional curriculum to enhance our culture of acceptance and respect. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of the student body will participate in Restorative Circles to build positive student-teacher relationships that will empower our school community. As a result, KAPPA III will have a 10% decrease in the number of infractions as reflected in the OORS system. Our grade six students will receive the Leader in Me curriculum to attain leadership and life skills that will promote student achievement. In addition, 100% of the students will attend weekly advisory sessions to build on the social emotional needs and continue to cultivate each child’s full potential. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Restorative Justice: this program will empower students to resolve conflicts in small groups in order to prevent and reduce suspensions. This support will help students cultivate a trusting, healthy and safe space while promoting a stronger sense of community. All students grades 6 through 8 and staff Sept. 2018 – June 2019 Restorative Practices will allow all school personnel to explore key concepts of restorative approaches, including the foundations of building healthy communities; restorative and retributive discipline; and dealing with incidents of harm. Sept. 2018 – June 2019 All Students grades 6 through 8. and staff Teachers will find meaningful ways of creating a culture of collaboration and help students take more ownership for their academic learning. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administration, Teachers, Counselor, Peer Mediation Advisors, Student Peer Mediators Administration, Teachers, Counselor, Peer Mediation Advisors, Student Peer Mediators Administrators, lead teacher, and faculty will provide incentives and school-wide activities to establish a school culture where students feel supported and challenged by their teachers and peers. All Students grades 6 through 8. Each student will lead their own conference to share with the school community and their families about their progress, goals, and plan for improvement at least once for the year. All Students grades 6 through 8. and staff and staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly parent workshops facilitated by teachers, mentors and coaches. Family engagement on Tuesdays (Sept.-June) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monies allocated as part of the NYCDOE will be used to support the success of the program initiatives and reduce teacher student ratio: after-school programs, teacher per session, per diem, teacher supplies, student materials and professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Beginning October 2018, our Student Success Team will analyze student attendance on a monthly basis, to monitor student participation in our advisory program. The attendance percentage will be used to assess whether we are on target towards meeting our goal for advisory enrollment. By February 2019, at least 75% of the students will reach their goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, an informal survey will be used to assess progress. In addition, conversation and feedback from school cabinets, student organization RFA liaisons, parent feedback through Pupil Path and classroom observations will inform progress with respect to this goal. August 2018 - Administer assessments September 2018 - Meet and Greet October 2018 - December 2018 - Review, plan and implement progress towards goal completion October - Student Led Conference January 2019 Re-evaluation of progress towards annual goals March 2019 - Student Led Conference May 2019 - Parent Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by SOP(s) Addressed X using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on a professional development survey, the Learning Environment Survey, the Framework for Great Schools, and the Quality Review Report, formative teams have been created to department teacher teams in inquiry work to determine trends in student thinking and implications for instruction. Teachers meet weekly to share best practices, evaluate student work, create CCLS aligned tasks, refine curriculum and analyze multiple forms of data as a means to enhance instructional practice and to improve student outcomes. Collaborative feedback contributes to our school's Instructional Focus. The results of the Principal Performance Review will indicate that the area of need as developed under the Danielson Framework in the area of 4.1 more than 50% of teachers received a rating of developing under the Danielson Framework 1E Designing Coherent Instruction, 3B Questioning and Discussion and 3D Using Assessment in Instruction. It was noted that the collaborative work of the teacher teams had a direct impact on, "shared improvements in teacher practice of 3C Engaging Students in Learning. When teachers work collaboratively, there is potential for growth which will ultimately to impact instruction. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Teachers will be given the opportunity to reflect and implement best practices learned after each professional learning session. Tiered level professional development will be provided to support teacher pedagogue in developing coherent instruction in all classrooms. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, using the New Teacher Center Student Learning Inquiry Process (SLIP) for analyzing student work, 100% of teachers will engage in cycles of data inquiry to monitor the proficient use of academic vocabulary in student work products. This cycle of learning will inform planning and re-teaching with an emphasis on: 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction) and 3B (Academic Discussion Techniques) of the Danielson Framework for Teaching. This will support students’ access to rigorous CCLS Argument Writing Tasks in: (ELA, Science and Social Studies) and open-ended CCLS-aligned Math Questions which will result in 5% increase in student performance on report cards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) The strategies extend throughout the school year from August 2018 - June 2019 The strategies extend throughout the school year from August 2018 - June 2019 Administrative Team, TC Staff Developer, Literacy Coach, Generation Ready , National Training Network Consultants, TIF Lead teachers and TIF demonstration teachers. Administrative Team, Literacy and Math Coaches, Generation Ready , National Training Network Consultants, TIF Lead teachers and TIF demonstration teachers. Co-planning in grade, subject and across grade/subject teams has been part of the KAPPA model to support teachers. This structure will be strengthened by having all English teachers meet with a Generation Ready staff developer in school for 30 days to deepen their work in reading and writing workshop (argumentative and informational writing). Teachers and students Science Teacher teams will participate in professional development with Urban Advantage and The Bronx Zoo (7th Grade), to establish common practices, curriculum mapping and supports across classrooms. Teachers and students Passport to Social Studies will be utilized to support rigorous social studies instruction and student inquiry. Units will be developed to offer a sequence of instruction that will be adapted to meet all student needs. All teachers will collaborate to plan differentiated lessons which include activities and questions to increase student achievement. For example, teachers will continue to use a school wide rubrics, develop common academic vocabulary lists and strategies, teach and reinforce common practices for engaging in and using research from multiple sources to deepen content knowledge and create meaningful work products, and provide students with similar organizational structures for argumentative and explanatory writing. We will begin to use common concept maps to increase the level of engagement with our ELL and SWD population. All Math Teachers will develop their level of questioning and student led discussions through support from our National Training Network Consultant. Teachers and students The strategies extend throughout the school year from Administrative Team, Literacy and Math Coaches, Generation Ready, National Training Network 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  In Grade level looking at student work teams: Teachers and students  Teachers collaborate on and implement strategies that support all students including ELLs and SWDs to master each standard. At the end of each Professional Learning Cycle (approximately every 6 weeks), data is summarized and shared with members of administration and in whole-staff workshops to identify patterns and trends across grade levels and to share successful re-teaching strategies. District 12 has provided the opportunity for the administration team consisting of principal and assistant principal, to be trained by NTC, developing their instructional leadership and their ability to supervise instructional mentoring in our building.All year 1 and year 2 teachers will receive mentoring through District 12''s initiative of NTC- trained mentors which use NYC's tool's and online mentoring system. August 2018 - June 2019 The strategies extend throughout the school year from August 2018 - June 2019 Consultants, TIF Lead teachers and TIF demonstration teachers. Administrative Team, Literacy and Math Coaches, Generation Ready, National Training Network Consultants, TIF Lead teachers and TIF demonstration teachers. Administration September 2018-June 2019 Principal and Assistant Principal District 12's Teacher Induction Program has allowed all year 1 and year 2 teachers are mentored by NTC-trained montors, using NYC's tools and online mentoring system. Mentors September 2018 - June 2019 Lead Teacher, Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly parent workshops facilitated by Parent Coordinator, teachers, mentors and coaches. Family engagement on Tuesdays (Sept.-June) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monies allocated as part of the NYCDOE will be used to support the success of the program initiatives and provide teachers with outside consultancy support to help lead and improve practice as per the Danielson Framework of Teaching: teacher per session, student materials, per diem, outside consultants .and professional development. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid - Point Benchmark: February 2019, the administration will gather evidence using the New Teacher Center protocols to assess student performance on CCLS Written ELA tasks and open ended aligned CCLS Math Questions. Mid-year and at the end of the year, we will meet with our Peer Collaborative Team to review and analyze progress in both contents, using KAPPA Progress Reports . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, KAPPA III will generate progress reports to assess whether the students have shown at least a 3% increase by the end of the second marking period. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve X critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As per our final MOTP Summary, Areas of of celebration were noted under the Danielson Framework: 3C (Engaging Students in Learning). Our teachers demonstrated growth in these areas through: collaboration in department and grade meetings, mentoring support and inter-class visitations. Areas of focus for the 2018-2019 school year are: 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction), 3b (Question and Discussion Techniques) and 3D (Using Assessment in Instruction). Our 2017-2018 data indicated that 55% of teachers received a rating of development, Under the Danielson Framework, in these components.. With the established goal listed above, we expect to decrease the number of teachers receiving a developing rating by 10%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  By June 2019, school leaders and teachers will collaborate to develop an ongoing differentiated professional learning plan that is targeted to meet the needs of all teachers as measured by an increase in component 1E (Designing coherent instruction), a minimum of 50% of the teachers will improve one level, in their practice, aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers Formal and informal observations will be conducted for each teacher based on city-wide instructional expectations. Pre-observation discussions will be centered on: analysis of student data, curriculum content; sequence of specific lesson being observed; rationale for lesson; teaching/learning plan; ELL/SWD supports; differentiation of activities; learning outcomes/expectations; questioning/discussion activities; and assessment as per the 8 priority components of the Danielson Rubric. The post-observation conferences will focus on the successes and challenges of the lesson, student work samples, the use of differentiation, data, grouping, individualized instruction, accountable talk, and the teacher’s self reflection/evaluation of the lesson. Teachers will be receiving timely, actionable, verbal and written feedback (i.e. glows and grows), as well as supports and suggestions for development in targeted components, with a specified time frame to be implemented. Tiered Professional Learning will be provided as follow up, to the feedback provided. Teachers Teachers School Leaders and teachers will develop a Professional Development Committee. The committee will evaluate recommendations and plan Professional Development to address all teacher needs and desires. All Professional Development will make connections to their teaching practices and the research based examples presented in workshops. In addition, staff members will write reflections demonstrating their understanding of the best practices and how these practices can help them improve their own teacher practice, as aligned with our Instructional Focus and Theory of Action. The strategies extend throughout the school year from October 2018 - June 2019 The strategies extend throughout the school year from August 2018 - June 2019 August 2018-June 2019 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Administrative Team Administrative Team Administrative Team, Literacy and Math Coaches, Generation Ready Consultants, TIF Lead teachers and TIF demonstration teachers. Lead, Model and Mentors will serve as demonstration teachers for all of our new staff. Mentors, Teacher Leaders August 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  3b – Parent and Family Engagement Lead/Model Teachers How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During our weekly Tuesday Parent Engagement, teachers will engage parents in content related workshops connected to the curriculum. (Sept.-June) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monies allocated as part of the NYCDOE will be used to fund outside consultants from Generation Ready to provide ongoing professional learning opportunities in large and small group settings. In addition funding will be provided to sustain in class teacher mentoring, demonstration and colleague to colleague articulation sessions: generation ready consultants, student materials, per session, per diem and online programs to support learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, we will assess teacher practice (utilizing the Advance tracking tool), in Domain 1E (Designing Coherent Instruction),that is aligned to the Danielson Framework to ensure teachers are making progress of at least 47% in the effective category. This assessment will be incorporated to identify areas of practice that need further development. In addition, new needs identified by this assessment tool can be incorporated into future professional development activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. In February 2019, Mid-year conferences will discuss the MOTP Score Tracker for all teachers and review areas of need. After careful review, we will determine which area requires more concentration towards meeting the annual goal. We will continue to make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At KAPPA III, parents are seen as integral partners in helping students learn. Family involvement and input is valued by the school. There is an expectation that a strong and open line of communication will exist between the school and the families. This partnership between home and school, supports our students and helps to ensure their success. We pride ourselves on maintaining frequent communication, a culture of trust and positive attitudes among students, staff, and parents. Teachers make many attempts to communicate with parents regarding the progress of their children. Parents are invited to attend several events throughout the year to build a sense of community between the home and school. The Framework For Great Schools highlighted the following areas: The school leader maintains a culture of mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and personal growth of students. 90% parents agree that school leaders ensure that there is regular communication with students and family in order to foster student achievements. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Over 90% of our parents agreed that they feel well informed by the communication they receive from their child's school. High expectations are communicated through the school's mission statement, weekly newsletter, parent meetings, online grade book (skedula), advisory, scholar dollar program, weekly language program and our college readiness career activities and trips. Needs: This year we are focusing on increasing parent involvement on academics, enrichment and social / emotional programs, by 5%. Our attendance at events last year, was low and our goal is to increase the level of parents involved in school activities. While we did show improvement in the area of parent communication, our current data indicates that our focus needs to be on parental involvement in the school community. Our focus is to build strong partnerships between parents, staff and students that enrich the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the PTA in collaboration with KAPPA III staff, will strengthen communication and community engagement between staff and families through an increase in the amount of school-wide events and parent workshops, resulting in a 5% increase in attendance of events. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 - June 2019 Administration Parent Coordinat-or Teachers Parents School Leaders  Professional Development Team  Teachers  Parent Coordinator Parents Teachers Students Parents Teachers Students September 2018 - June 2019 School Leaders  Professional Development Team  Teachers  Parent Coordinator September 2018 - June 2019  School Leaders  Professional Development Team  Teachers  Parent Coordinator Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Providing regularly updated information about activities in the subject areas as well as homework and upcoming assignments, curriculum outlines, and other related information communicated via our weekly newsletter, grade conferences, orientations, and Parent Teacher Association meetings. Easy accessibility to this information enables parents to better support their children’s academic progress from home. Parents are invited to attend weekly, grade conferences in which administrators, grade teachers, parents and students meet to discuss individual academic and social progress. During these meetings, strategies are identified to be used both at home and school to support the student’s needs. Follow up meetings will reveal student progress and provide opportunities to revisit recommendation and revise those support strategies as needed. Addressing Student Needs: Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need student subgroups  Through a collaborative effort of the parent coordinator, guidance counselor, teachers, ELL teacher, and special education teachers, parents are offered informative workshops to educate them on the curriculum and ways they can help their child(re) at home. This helps to establish a community of trust.  The ELL teacher holds individual, parent orientation meetings to discuss the ELL program and placement choices.  Special education teachers meet with parents yearly for annual reviews to discuss the progress of their child(ren). Academic strengths and needs which are based on Common Core Learning Standards are discussed. Goals are designed to meet the individual needs of students. Progress reports are sent home quarterly to inform parents of progress toward mastery of grade level goals.  Time is allotted on Tuesday afternoons for parent communication, in the form of telephone and face-to face conferences in order to help establish a positive relationship between parents and teachers. Parental Involvement: A community of trust is established between the school and the parents in the following ways:  Parents are invited to visit their children’s classroom during Open School Week to see first-hand the learning that is taking place.  Weekly newsletters and parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  calendars are sent home which include dates of important events happening at our school. Time is allotted on Tuesday afternoons for parent communication, in the form of telephone and face-to face conferences.  Parents are invited to join the School Leadership Team or Parent Teacher Association (PTA) so they may play an active role in monitoring the progress of our CEP for the 2017-18 school year. The meetings are held on a rotating basis, in order to accommodate parent's schedules.  Student-led parent teacher conferences are held. This allows students the opportunity to share their personal academic strengths and needs. Teachers are able to discuss strategies the parents can use to assist their children at home.  Our Parent Coordinator has an open door policy when it comes to our parent community By June 2019, all staff members will be utilizing Skedula and Pupil Path daily to monitor and share students’ progress and anecdotal information with parents and members of the school community. As technology continues to expand, we believe that it is necessary for us to provide continuous training and support for all parents on the usage of Skedula and Class Dojo. Parents Teachers Students September 2018 - June 2019  School Leaders  Professional Development Team  Teachers  Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. A minimum of 8 Parent workshops will be held by the parent coordinator and administration. Information will also go out in weekly newsletters. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration and teachers will be allocated time to offer special programs for parents, including workshops. Participation from parents as chaperone. Pupil Path Time on Tuesdays will be designated for conferences with parents. PTA will hold special events for parents. ENL teacher, SWD coordinator and Guidance Counselor will conduct quarterly parent workshops. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will review our workshops attendance to determine if we see an increase of 2.5% and that we are on pace to meet our yearly goal of 5% increase. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. By February 2019, the school's administration team will review attendance data from previous year and make a comparison to monitor growth and determine if we are on progress to meet our goal. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) All students will meet four times every other week, during the school day as part of their regular program for an academy that is designed to address the skills in need as identified by our quarterly diagnostics Students scoring level two or below are mandated and or invited to attend afternoon and/or Saturday tutoring sessions. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.)  Reading Literacy Assessments Subject Skill, Concept, Knowledge Assessments   Classroom performance and assessments  Portfolios Formative  Assessments  Report card grades Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) During RTI the following programs are being utilized: News ELA, I-Ready, Achieve 3000, Spotlight, and Code X. News ELA is used to create assignments based on lexile levels Differentiate assignments, based on student levels, interest and learning modalities.  Diagnostic  Assessments Student writing samples Use kits to develop student skills and sub-skills strengths in areas that need attention. English Language Arts teachers, with the guidance of the ELA consultant will plan and implement strategies to address the identified needs of the learner Students will learn and apply varied reading comprehension skills 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  Mathematics  Math  Assessments Subject Skill, Concept, Knowledge Assessments  Classroom performance and assessments  Portfolios Formative  Assessments  Report card grades  Diagnostic  Assessments Student writing samples Science  Reading Literacy Assessments Subject Skill, Concept, Knowledge Assessments  as modeled by the teacher. Parents will be sent quarterly progress reports to reflect gains. During RTI the following programs are being utilized: Mo-Math Investigations, Skill and Drill, Weekly word problems, CMP, teacher made materials and I Ready Small group instruction I Ready is used to create assignments based on skills. Differentiate assignments, based on student levels, interest and learning modalities. Students scoring level two or below are mandated and or invited to attend morning or afternoon tutoring sessions. Parents will be sent quarterly progress reports to reflect gains. Students will receive additional services to support, as needed the development of writing labs, review for testing and Small Group Instruction All students will meet four times every other week, during the school day as part of their regular program for an academy that is designed to address the skills in need as identified by our quarterly diagnostics Students scoring level two or below are mandated and or invited to attend afternoon and/or Saturday tutoring sessions. Small Group Instruction Selected students will meet one/two or times a week, during the school day as part of their regular program for an academy that is designed to address 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  Social Studies the skills in need as identified by our quarterly diagnostics Students scoring level two or below are mandated and or invited to attend afternoon tutoring sessions. Selected students will meet one/two or times a week, during the school day as part of their regular program for an academy that is designed to address the skills in need as identified by our quarterly diagnostics Students scoring level two or below are mandated and or invited to attend afternoon tutoring sessions. Small Group Instruction  Classroom performance and assessments  Portfolios Formative  Assessments  Report card grades  Diagnostic  Assessments Student writing samples  Reading Literacy Assessments Subject Skill, Concept, Knowledge Assessments   Classroom performance and assessments  Portfolios Formative  Assessments  Report card grades  Diagnostic  Assessments Student writing samples completion of science projects. Implement a hands-on learning approach through the use of FOSS Kits Students will use a hands mobile science lab utilizing a variety of learning modalities. Parents will be sent quarterly progress reports to reflect gains. Develop the skills to answer document based questions Graphs and illustrations will be used to develop a greater understanding of interpretive data. Compare and contrast two or more documents in historical data. Students will receive additional support as needed for the development of essay writing, completion of social studies projects and test review. Parents will be sent quarterly progress reports to reflect gains. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.)  Student surveys  Attendance  Anecdoctal  records Intervention committee Small Group Instruction Selected students will meet one or two times a week, during the school day as part of their regular program for an academy that is designed to address the needs on an individual basis. Our guidance counselor provides group and one-on-one counseling to at-risk students. In addition our guidance counselor has created an advisory component to service all of the students in the school. This service occurs during the school-day. Our counselor also services students referred to her via our Intervention Committee. Our Intervention committee receives referrals from teachers and parents with concern of a child’s social/emotional state as well as academic deficiencies. When necessary our school counselor will mediate meetings with parents and students to discuss school performances. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We currently have thirty seven students in Temporary Housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide all of students in temporary housing with the uniform and school supplies needed to ensure they are well prepared for and throughout the school year. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. To recruit highly qualified teachers, the administrative team organized a hiring committee consisting of teachers, to provide input into the hiring process. Our vacancies are posted through the New Teacher Finder, open market and university hiring boards. We hire teachers certified in content areas only. In an effort to retain highly qualified teachers, we ensure that the proper supports are in place to provide them with differentiated professional development. Our professional development is based on current topics and research based. Administrators and lead teachers collaborate to design professional development that is tailored to focus on each teacher's interest, need and area for improvement. In addition, we have developed model classrooms that are designed to model best practices. Inter-visitations are included as part of our professional development to utilize hands on learning. 1. Create additional time for teachers during the school day to plan, use data, share ideas and work collaboratively in a positive and inviting environment. 2. Grade level team work was established to build teacher collaboration through the creation and ongoing support of grade level teacher teams. 3. Instruction leaders play a key role in establishing an emphasis on the use of data to drive instructional decisions. These leaders also sit directly in all grade and content team meetings. In their role they have the ability to use coaching, mentoring and professional development skills to convey the importance of the learning as they work together. 4. Our Instructional Lead teachers have significant input into the hiring decisions and professional development provided at KAPPA. Our Instructional Lead Teachers make up the panel as the potential applicant is interviewed as well as they serve as observational participants in viewing the demonstration lesson of the applicant. 5. Mentors are assigned to support struggling and unqualified teachers. 6. Support those teachers who are not currently highly qualified to continue their course work and inform staff about opportunities state wide and city wide for continuing education and obtaining a license. Teachers regularly meet and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  are provided professional development in various areas and particularly individualized for those who are not highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development is essential to our school. All teachers are required to be a part of at least one Professional Learning Community. Our Professional Development occurs twice a week and staff is engaged in inquiry-based work around the Common Core State Standards. We have instilled extra time that is dedicated towards high quality, ongoing professional development. Additionally, administration, teachers and paraprofessionals attend off-site PD opportunities regularly. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers work collaboratively to select or design assessments from Engage, Expeditionary Learning and the DOE’s recommended CCLS-aligned instructional materials. Expeditionary Learning and Algebra For All were selected through teacher discussion and consensus. The school’s Measures of Student Learning, (MOSL), was presented to teachers to make their decisions for assessments to be included in local measures category for 2017-2018 teacher MOSL evaluations 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Administrators and Lead Teachers attended professional development sessions. The Lead Teachers submitted their recommendations to the Principal and shared their work process and decisions with the staff. Staff members are encouraged to access the Advance website for updates. During professional learning sessions, teachers work collaboratively to analyze NYS Performance assessment results and use the results to purposely plan to improve instruction. Teachers also analyze student work collaboratively to build an understanding of their students and to provide appropriate interventions to close student achievement gaps and provide enrichment. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 363,868.00 N/A N/A 0 12,366.00 0 2,850,218.00 X N/A N/A N/A X N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) Budget and Resource N/A N/A N/A Budget and Resource N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy.  Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy KAPPA III’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Our school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The school shall hold annual meetings to include parents on discussions regarding Title 1 program planning. Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, our school will:  Create and sustain Book Talks for Parents with topics of interest as requested through our parent needs survey, Parent/ Professor Forums to discuss academic curriculum of each grade and State Initiatives such as the Common Core Learning Standard and Social Events to make connections within the school community.  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact.  Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills.  Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact. Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills.  Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.  The 1% Parent Involvement set aside funds will be used to conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home.  Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report.  Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions.   Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed.  Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help. Our school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50   Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year.  Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. Supporting or hosting Family Day events.   Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents.  Hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children. Parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents.  Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers.  Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress.  Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress.  Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) KAPPA III will provide parents with our school compact which will outline how the parents, students and staff will share the responsibility for improved student achievements. KAPPA III will provide high-quality curriculum and instruction in a supportive and effective learning environment. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum We will contain to maintain the home school relationship by hosting a variety of family events. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff School staff is available daily. We have an open door policy where parents are welcomed. I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents At KAPPA III, we value family involvement and input. There is an expectation that a strong and open line of communication will exist between the school and the families. This partnership helps to ensure their success. We pride ourselves on maintaining frequent communication, a culture of trust and positive attitudes among students, staff, and parents. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities KAPPA III COMMITMENT TO EXCELLENCE PARENT/GUARDIAN COMPACT Parent’s/Guardian’s Commitment I fully commit to KAPPA III in the following ways: Student’s Name: _______________________________ Class: __________________ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Name of Parent(s)/Guardian(s): _________________________________ We fully commit to KAPPA III in the following ways:  We will make sure our child arrives at KAPPA III on time, ready for homeroom in proper dress code.  We will make arrangements so our child can remain at KAPPA III until 2:30 pm as identified in our child’s schedule.  We will arrange for our child to come on appropriate tutoring sessions on: Wednesday/Thursday 2:30-4:00 and/or Saturdays from 9:00 am – 12:00 pm.  We will ensure that our child comes to KAPPA III during the summer school orientation the week of August.  We will always help our child in the best way we know how and will do whatever it takes for him/her to learn. We will check our child’s school work and homework every night, and let him/her call the teacher if there is a problem with the homework. We will make sure our child reads every night.  We will always make ourselves available to our child and the school to address all concerns.  We will carefully read all papers that the school sends home to us, and will sign and return them promptly.  We will submit a note/letter to the school whenever our child is absent. We will allow our child to go on KAPPA III field trips.  We will make sure our child follows the KAPPA III dress code.  We will ensure that our child has all of the necessary school supplies and materials needed, on a daily basis.  We understand that our child must follow the KAPPA III rules to protect the safety, interests, and rights of all individuals in the classroom. We, not the school, are responsible for the behavior and actions of our child.  We will assist the school in fund raising activities; attend orientations, conferences and family activities.  Celebrations must be discussed with class professor, clear with administrator. Any celebration must adhere to the last 30 minutes of the school day. Parent/Guardian must be aware of allergies that students many have, therefore nuts of any kind is prohibited in our school.  We will make all attempts to schedule any outside appointments for our child towards the beginning or end of the day.  We understand that the school staff will routinely contact us with any concerns or praise regarding our child and we will cooperate fully with any requests made.  We understand that a KAPPA III, no excuses are accepted and excellence is expected. Failure to adhere to the commitment may cause my child to lose various KAPPA III privileges. Parent(s)/Guardian(s) Signatures: __________________________________ III. Student Responsibilities STUDENT CODE OF CONDUCT CONTRACT Student’s Name: _______________________________ Class: __________________ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Behavior      I will always behave respectfully towards all professors and students. I will always speak appropriately and will not engage in physical or verbal violence. I will respect the school building and will not deface any part of the building. I will not bring electronic devices to school. (Cell phones are not to be seen) I understand that gum chewing and candy are prohibited even in the Campus Dining Hall. Morning Procedure    I will arrive at the security desk at 7:30am if I want to eat breakfast. I will line up with my homeroom class at 7:50am in the designated area when the professor raises his/her hand. I will get a late pass, in the main office, if I arrive after 8:15am. Hallway    I will walk on the right side of the hallway at all times possible. I will focus my attention forward at all times and respond to the signal given by the professor for attention. I will not touch items hanging from the walls. Classroom    I will stand at attention behind the desk and recite the Subject Area Chant with my class. I will sit down quietly at my desk, where I will open my binder, take out my homework, and begin the BBC. I will complete the BBC within 5 minutes. Lunch      I will not throw food, make a mess, or cause loud disruption. I will use the restroom before the end of the lunch period. I will clean up the tables and surrounding area. I will wait quietly while the professor calls each class to line up. I will line up quietly as directed when the professor give the signal. Dismissal  I will wait for my parent/guardian to pick me up or I will go straight home and will not loiter around the bus stop. I understand that failure to adhere to these codes will result in immediate disciplinary action. Student Signature: ________________________________ Date: _____________ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The NYSESLAT and ELA data will be used to select the ELL students that will be part of the program. We will have an after-school program, morning program and Saturday academy for our current entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding and commanding students for the following time and days: (Morning Session Mon-Friday 7:15-8:15, Afternoon Sessions Wednesday/Thursday - 2:30-4:00 and Saturday Academy- 9:00-12:00), focusing on ELA and Math. Students will focus on public speaking and listening skills. Our Afterschool and Saturday academy will focus on reading non-fiction texts and critical writing skills. In addition, academic vocabulary (non-fiction) will be the focus and students will use IXL, News ELA, Finish Line and other resources to enhance their listening, speaking, reading and writing vocabulary. The teacher will be meeting with special education teachers to determine the focused language vocabulary for the upcoming weeks so that it can be supplemented in our programs. Before School: The program will start in September 2018 and end in June 2019 for a total of 64 sessions. It will operate on Monday through Friday from 7:15 – 8:15 am. This program will target the 14 ELLs who scored at the Entering through Transitioning levels based on the 2017 NYSESLAT. The service provider will be a certified ENL teacher and one bilingual teacher. The ENL teacher will provide services three days a week and the bilingual teacher will provide service the other two days a week. Instruction will be differentiated based on the EDAT (ELL Data Analysis Tool). Native language support will be emphasized with the Entering level students through access to bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. used of the native language to reinforce tasks, to expand meaning through vocabulary and buddy system. After School: The program will start September 2018 and end in June 2019 for a total of 38 sessions. It will operate on Wednesday and Thursdays from 2:30 – 4:00 pm. This program will target the 19 ELLs who scored at the Expanding level and 3 Former ELLs based on the 2017 NYSESLAT. The service provider will be a certified ELA teacher, Math Teacher and the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher will rotate for 45 minutes with each content teacher to provide language support. Instruction will be differentiated based on the EDAT analysis. Native language support will be provided in the form of bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. The school will use other funding sources to complement the cost of the Saturday Activity. Based on data for the NYSELAT and ELAWe currently have the following student score break down for the NYSLELAT 2017:1 Grade 6 entering0 Grade 6 emerging5 Grade 6 transitioning4 Grade 6 expanding4 Grade 6 commanding0 Grade 7 entering0 Grade 7 emerging2 Grade 7 transitioning11 Grade 7 expanding0 Grade 7 commanding0 Grade 8 entering0 Grade 8 emerging3 Grade 8 transitioning8 Grade 8 expanding4 Grade 8 commandingWe currently have 1 French Student, 2 Bengali Students, 1 Twi student and the rest are Spanish.*The Title III Supplemental Saturday Academy Program, Morning Tutoring and After School Program will 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information operate from September 2018 through June 2019.Students will participate in this program that will focus on the four components of language development: listening, speaking, reading and writing. The intent of the programs is to provide the students with the necessary skill to use the English language to their fullest ability. The language of instruction will be English. One ENL certified teacher will teach the students categorized as an ELL learners to increase performance levels in literacy and mathematics.Software programs such as I-Ready, News ELA and MSQI strategies will be utilized. I-Ready embeds numerous supportive features that are particularly helpful to learners in need of strategic and intensive support. Their research shows that after 60 hours of study with IXL, a significant proportion of students (50%-70%) will increase their oral proficiency with at least one level. Our instructional focus for school year 2018-2019, is to strengthen instruction and curriculum by emphasizing the development of academic vocabulary so that students are able to articulate their thinking in academic discussions. We will emphasize this across all contents using Word Generation which emphasizes learning goals such as: using academic language, developing an argument, reasoning analytically, reading to find evidence and discussing various perspectives. Tier 2 academic vocabulary will be shared and emphasized in each class: In mathematics, we will emphasize problem based lessons so that students are able to justify varied pathways to solve problems, In Social Studies and Science students will employ academic vocabulary to discuss controversial topics. In ELA Word Generation is creating opportunities for students to develop their academic language by reading and deepening their understanding of current issues. In addition, News ELA, and Finish Line will also be used to focus on the developmental process for reading and writing through hands-on activities along with teacher editions and audio tapes. We have also purchased notebooks, paper and supplies for the students to record their writing samples during these programs. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our certified ENL Teacher will receive professional learning on the use of ESL methodology in the content areas. In addition our ENL teacher will attend Translating Research To Practice in house provided by lead teachers with special emphasis on strategies to enhance student engagement as identified in the Danielson Framework of Teaching. Teachers will also receive professional learning sessions from outside consultants to help align instruction with the next generation learning standards. Our ENL Teacher will receive directed training which includes one on one coaching as follows: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Part C: Professional Development Teaching using ELL Strategies Provider is Teachers College Consultant, Generation Ready Consultant and Goldman Sour Consultant. Consultants will meet with the ENL teacher September - June for one on one training and coaching on the design and implementation of literacy instruction to ELL students, focusing especially on the three domains of literacy development and instruction: 1. conversational and academic language 2. sources or reading difficulties for ELL students 3. impact of instructional strategies to promote their classroom practice. The ENL Teacher will attend the following workshops: Independent Workshop -Kristen Gripp, Consultant -Generation Ready one on one clinics for ENL teacher on lesson plan development and Next Generation Standards Aligned to content areas to provide clear expectations leading to college and career readiness, this will be offered during the school day 8:10- 2:20 PM. Consultant will work directly with ENL teacher to build and expand their toolbox in working with ELL students to facilitate professional learning/common planning, Teaching the students to pronounce words clearly, follow all directions and commands, and respond appropriately to oral questions. Specific workshops such as oral language development, literacy and instructional implications for the ELL learner and academic achievement will be provided. The ENL teacher attend the workshops listed below to turnkey the strategies learned to other teachers during 2 Monday P.D. sessions in January (2:30 - 4:00). They will work together to integrate strategies in designing activities for the after school program. -November the Bronx Field Support Center will offer English Language Learners Promising Practices focus being: Alignment of Blueprint for student success and instructional expectations. -December facilitated by the Bronx Field Support Center will focus on the following: English Language Learner Support. - January Students with disabilities including English Language Learners. We will document all PD sessions through the use of attendance sheets and agendas. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents will be invited to participate in two parent workshops in the fall and spring on: Ways to help your student achieve in school. These events will be about ways to assist their child to achieve to their fullest potential and strategies to help their children at home. Parents will also be invited to an introductory workshop to inform them of the language acquisition skills that students will be exposed to during the after school program. Parents will be notified through notices, weekly chronicle and through the school phone messenger (translated by the DOE translation unit and by school's phone messenger service). All workshops will be lead by 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities certified ENL teachers. Anticipated dates for the workshops are in November and January. We will maintain attendance and agendas to monitor participation. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name KAPPA III Borough Bronx School Number 316 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jean E Colon Coach Kristen Gripp ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Rachel Malinari Teacher/Subject Area Christopher Mennell/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Detmer / Social Studies Related-Service Provider Rosario Evangelista Superintendent Jacqueline Rosado Assistant Principal Canchetta Temple-Hall Coach Nicole Vairo School Counselor Enlly Paulino Parent Paulette Lyn Parent Coordinator Juana Pena- Ovalles Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Ruiz Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 389 Total number of ELLs 48 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.34% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 3 2 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At KAPPA III we evaluate the students' literacy skills through running records and various teacher created materials. For the ELLs that have taken the ELA exam, we evaluate the exam results to determine student levels as well. We use the data from the NYSITELL, I-Ready, Performance Series, ELA Scores and NYSESLAT to also help determine the students' strengths and weaknesses. We have learned from the review of our data that our ELL students have a strength in listening/ speaking skills and a weakness in reading/ writing skills. Focus is placed on reading and writing skills within all classrooms to concentrate on improving those skills. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61 The ENL teacher will combine students’ informal assessments with standardized data to measure individual progress and help drive instruction. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Collaboration between the ENL teacher and content teachers enables all ELLs to receive targeted instruction to address their language needs. The ENL teacher also has access to all standardized assessment data and content area measures of progress. This allows for specific academic and linguistic interventions and extra individual student support. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The NYSESLAT scores are analyzed for student growth by level and skill. ELL students in levels 1 & 2 are provided with extra support through focused conferencing. Students are mandated to participate in either the extra-curricular after school State Readiness Program or the Saturday Academy Program, which would benefit their progress in literacy and Mathematics. Explicit vocabulary building and reading comprehension strategies are provided through connected, interdisciplinary units. Running records are utilized to monitor reading levels. Rigorous literature is provided and materials are developed to differentiate according to need and move students to the next level. In math,  student progress is monitored through the use of portfolios, and CMP3 testing. Targeted skills and assignments are created in Math to move students to mastery utilizing the corresponding additional CMP3 resources as well as I-Ready New York State Practice and Instructional tools. Lessons are differentiated to address the student needs in Math. In Science & Social Studies, all content area teachers are involved in the data analysis and planning for student success. The Inquiry team examined performance indicators in Science and Social Studies to find alignment and connections to skills in ELA, as well as concepts in math. Resources and lessons are developed and differentiated to target skills in need of improvement. Progress is monitored closely by teachers through assessment, portfolios and conferences, progress reports and report cards to identify if the ELL student has met the promotion criteria. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students receive additional instruction through before-school and after-school programs with the ENL teacher and the bilingual certified teacher. Entering and Emerging ELLs also receive stand-alone ENL instruction in addition to push-in services in content classes. Students who have been identified as academically at risk are also included in extra curricular tutoring and one-on-one instruction with the ENL teacher. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSESLAT scores, ELA / Math / Science / Social Studies State Assessments, Spring and Fall Periodic Assessments, Lexile Measure scores from Performance Series, and in-class measures of growth are all used to monitor student progress in language skills and content area achievement. At KAPPA III we have found that our ELL population consistently do better on the listening/ speaking section of the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL across proficiency levels and grades, and we target the weaker Reading and Writing skills to boost student growth. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? After each round of assessments throughout the year, scores are analyzed by the ENL teacher and co-teachers to identify specific areas of focus for targeted instruction. Activities in extra curricular programs are also tailored to meet the needs of students as reflected in their assessment data. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At KAPPA III the organizational models we use for ENL instruction are both pull-out and push-in models. The students that are serviced via push-in method, traditionally are homogeneous groups in the same grade/ class. The students that are serviced via pull-out model are normal heterogeneous in grouping. The ENL teacher works collaboratively with the classroom teachers to support the ENL students. Classroom teachers conference regularly with the ENL teacher to learn ENL strategies to assist ELL students in their classrooms. The ESL teacher supports the ELL students with support such as using manipulatives, expressive language, and total body response when delivery vocabulary, instruction, and/or constant verbal communication to ensure full understanding of the lesson. Instruction in all content areas is often composed of a mini-lesson (link and modeling), active engagement, independent work, differentiated small groups, and a share-out. Students are encouraged to incorporate turn and talk, cooperative learning, and partner work throughout the day. The ENL program is a push-in program, and students are grouped by grade, and have mixed proficiency levels. Beginner and intermediate ELL students are serviced for two units of ENL instruction and two units of ELA from their classroom teachers daily. The advanced students are serviced for one unit of ENL, one unit of ELA from classroom teachers. Students are grouped heterogeneously for literacy instruction, according to their NYSITELL and NYSESLAT scores. The administration and ENL teacher reviews the schedule to ensure all beginner and intermediate students are serviced for at least 360 minutes weekly and advanced students are serviced for at least 180 minutes each week, as per CR part 154. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The only language of instruction at KAPPA III is English. Our program model of ENL receive the necessary ENL and ELA instructional units as required by Commissioner's Regulations Part 154. The English Proficiency as per score on the NYSESLAT/NYSITELL or Spanish Lab (for new admits ): Entering/Emerging ELLs are receiving 360 minutes per week of ENL instruction. Transitioning/Expanding ELLs are receiving 180 minutes of ENL instruction. Commanding ELLs are receiving at least 90 minutes of ENL instruction. Those students who have met their English proficiency level (former ELLs), are provided with in-class, indirect instruction from the ENL teacher. Commanding students will also receive ENL testing accommodations for two years after reaching the level of proficiency. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  All instruction at KAPPA III is delivered in English. The students attend content area classes and the ENL teacher reviews what was taught in class by going over the material and especially addressing vocabulary needs. Both English and content areas are addressed using ELL methodologies. Instruction is geared toward meeting the common core learning standards by taking an additive approach and building on prior knowledge and assessing what the students' strengths and weaknesses are. Content is delivered through whole class, small group or individual direct instruction. During push-in instruction, a co-teaching model is used for whole class instruction and small group instruction is used within leveled guided instruction. By carefully and consistently tracking our ELL students, we are confident that all of our English Language Learners are receiving the appropriate educational services. Our goals focus on the following areas: To provide academic subject-area instruction in English using ELL methodology and instructional strategies. To provide ELL strategic instruction. To provide assistance to students to demonstrate progress on the state designated level of English proficiency for their grade. To provide the necessary support for each ELL student to meet and or exceed State standards. KAPPA III's ELL program is taught by 1 certified teacher . Our program features a blended model of instruction, incorporating a push-in program and a pull-out program for our beginner group. Our ELL students receive a standards-based instruction which encompasses all of the academic subject areas. Science, social studies, and math are also included in the ELL program. All four modalities of language: listening/speaking/reading/writing are included in all ELL lessons. The ELL program at KAPPA III embodies the conceptual understanding of challenging content and well developed learning strategies that will prepare ELL’s to think critically, solve problems and communicate in everyday life situations. They will and can demonstrate their academic rigor in some of the following ways: • Making connections to texts • Learning experiences • Prior knowledge • Use of language in discussions, group work, and in presentations • Understand the multiple meanings of words • Collect, analyze and organize information • Perform multi-step tasks All of our students receive the mandated amount of ELL instruction that is required. Beginners and intermediate students receive 360 minutes a week, while the advance students receive 180 minutes a week with an additional 180 minutes of English Language Arts instruction. All students are serviced by a licensed ENL teacher. These students are grouped by proficiency level. Instruction is modified to meet our student’s needs. We incorporate their Native Language in our teachings by utilizing the buddy system. We allow them to express themselves in their native language until they have some command of English. Our classroom teachers receive staff development on how to incorporate ENL principles and practices into their classrooms. Students who are newcomers, or are not making progress, attend our After-school program or our Saturday Academy. All students also receive Response To Intervention (RTI) four times a week. These additional services help the ELL child to receive small-group instruction in the reading components of phonemic awareness, phonics, letter recognition and writing. NYSESLAT results are analyzed to provide better instruction for our children through increased differentiation. Our goal is to enhance our students’ language acquisition to help them reach state standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At KAPPA III our Spanish-speaking ELL students take the Spanish Lab and they receive interim assessments specifically for the ELLs by Acuity. Small group instruction is scheduled for all ELL students to ensure that they have a clear understanding of the concepts that are being taught on a daily basis. Support groups for the newly arrived students will be formed in order to make a smooth transition into the school system, and these groups will focus on developing strategies that students can use to increase their academic achievement. We will provide Native Language support for the students with the use of native language books and a buddy system. Use of Native Language in our building will be provided with native language books 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  placed in both the classrooms and a special section of the school library that will house these books. We will also try to use the buddy system with our children whenever possible during reading. We do not offer Native Language Arts since we do not have Bi-Lingual classes at this time. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students will be evaluated initially by the NYSITELL scores and a plan of action is developed to assist them. Basic reading and math skills are a focus for them. If the child has no school experience, a beginning reading program is the starting point focusing on sight words, picture/ word correlation, and phonics skills. In math basic addition and subtraction skills with the use of math manipulatives are used. If the student has some schooling history, reading and writing skills would be addressed such as main idea, sequencing, and punctuation and grammar. A teacher is assigned to tutor and mentor that child. Computer programs, such as Rosetta stone and brain pop is used to assist the student via technology. We draw on students' backgrounds, their experiences, cultures, and languages to create a text to self connection. b. The ELL program starts the students reading and writing from the first class. Basic vocabulary is studied with the use of visual and auditory assistance. Word Gen and short stories are used as a learning tool consisting of a few sentences are written. As a student progresses, longer stories and writing assignments with increasing difficulty is added to the lessons as necessary for testing such as main idea, etc. are introduced. We organize the classroom to ensure that conversation between peers develops academic concepts and language. c. ELL students in the program with more than three years will be immersed in content area subjects. Content area vocabulary will be developed. Reading and writing will encompass literature in the different subject areas and skills needed to understand those stories such as the use of chunking. The major emphasis moved from listening/ speaking skills and to reading/ writing development. In math the reading of word problems and development of problem solving skills are formed. Vocabulary is repeated naturally as it appears in different content area studies. d. ELL students in the program six years or longer will continue with content area instruction stressing reading and writing skills. Tutorials will be used to review the skills taught. Test taking skills will be emphasized. The ENL teacher works closely with the teacher to incorporate topics learned in class. Language support is provided for these students in the ELL classroom. We organize collaborative activities and scaffold instruction to build students academic English proficiency. Again, vocabulary is repeated naturally as it appears in different content area studies. e. All former ELL students continue to get test modifications for two years following a score of proficient on the NYSESLAT. We will continue to support our former ELL students by providing them with academic folders that have content-area, differentiated learning aids and common-core learning tasks and tips. The ENL teacher will periodically check in with the students and their teachers in order to ensure they continue to stay on track. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? For ELL students with disabilities, differentiated activities are provided based on the baseline assessments, Spring NYSESLAT scores, periodic assessments and needs outlined in the student IEP. After reviewing test scores and IEP mandates, students are placed in the class setting with supports outlined in their IEPs. Students are also part of the ELL pull-out/ push-in program, receiving services in accordance with test results and their IEPs. Special education and the ENL teachers collaborate monthly to determine the short term academic and lingual goals for each ELL student with special needs, as these evaluations should be progressive and open to change, as per the student’s individual education plan. Differentiated lessons will be tailored in order to meet the academic needs of these students. Teaching strategies to facilitate the ELL-SWD students include small group instruction that emphasizes peer group work. The ENL teacher will incorporate different ways to present the information, for example, the teacher will provide visual aids, graphic organizers or story read-alongs on tape to address the visual and auditory 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  learners. All ELL students will be given a laptop to use both in school and at home to meet their individual learning needs and styles. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Additional ELL periods are scheduled during the students' "zero period" in order to cause a minimum disruption to the students' academic schedule. The curriculum is adapted to the needs of the individual student. ELL students with IEPs have programs that are the least restrictive, such as SETSS classes. All teachers of ELL students collaborate as a team in order to best serve students. Common planning time is used to further assist our students by discussing the students' needs with each other. When appropriate, students from special education classes join students in regular education classes for certain core subjects. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All students, including ELL students, are mandated to attend additional support services. In addition, these students are encouraged to attend after-school programs that provide homework assistance. After school instructional programs are staffed by certified content area teachers. Incentive programs are offered as a reward to encourage students to complete their homework and class work, as well as encourage reading. Differentiation is used in all lessons to better target the individual students' needs. The intervention provided to students help foster both academic and language needs. When ever possible, multiple subjects are infused into the curriculum. The ENL teacher makes core subject vocabulary more understandable for our students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year ENL teacher provides extra morning support for all/any ELL students who need extra support. The morning program meets three days a week from 7:30am-8:00am, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are not going to discontinue any ELL programs at KAPPA III. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs are encouraged to participate in any academic, athletic and social programs that are offered during and after the school day. They are mandated to participate in our after school program "State Readiness Program". KAPPA III also conducts Saturday Academy to offer additional support to all students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Our ELL students learn through exposure to interactions with technology, such as Achieve 3000, Khan Academy and Rosetta Stone. The classroom libraries and instructional materials are aligned with the school’s Common Core curriculum and reflect the home language/s of our ELL students. Our ELL students have access to netbooks and are able to access learning sites such Achieve 3000, which provide scaffolding strategies that allow the ELL students to have access to differentiated learning materials. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? At KAPPA III there is no TBE and Dual Language programs. For the ELL program, students are paired (i.e. cooperative grouping) to encourage and support others in their native language. There are many Spanish speaking paraprofessionals in the building who offer their time to aid students that need native language support. The use of bi-lingual glossaries are available for the students if needed. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services, support, and resources are aligned to correspond to the age and grade of the student. The content taught reflects the common core while still being age appropriate material. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our ELL students learn through exposure to interactions with technology, such as Finish Line, Khan Academy and iXL. The classroom libraries, subject glossaries, and instructional materials are aligned with the school’s Common Core curriculum and reflect the home language/s of our ELL students. Our ELL students have access to iPads and are able to access learning sites such iXL and dual lingo, which provide scaffolding strategies that allow the ELL students to have access to differentiated learning materials. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). There are no formal activities during the summer for newly enrolled ELL students. During the school year all ELL students are encouraged to take advantage of all the activities the school has to offer, both academic, athletic, and social. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1. KAPPA III will have professional development designed for grade and or curriculum meetings. This professional development will present all teachers and staff with clinical tested researched based study that will provide strategies for instruction to enhance student learning. New teachers are provided with professional development opportunities to acquire the seven and a half hours required under Jose P. regulations. This information is recorded in the pedagogue’s personnel file. The professional development will be presented by Math and ELA consultants from AUSSIE, SETRC Trainers, ELL Instructional Specialists from the Leadership LSO, Administrators, Bilingual Education Technical Assistance Centers (BETAC) and other outside consultants. The professional development will focus on but will not be limited to: September The Principles of Learning/Danielson Framework October Orientation to ENL Program November Danielson Framework part II/Analyzing and using Data to Drive Instruction December ENL Methodologies and Strategies January Reading Comprehension and Writing Skills in the Content Area Classroom February Balanced Literacy/Mathematics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  March Formal and Informal Assessments April NYSESLAT Training May Intervention Services June Planning for next year There are periodic staff development sessions, where the ENL teacher discusses several instructional methods that can be used by classroom teachers to aid in achieving English language proficiency of ELL students. These topics are presented during staff development sessions at scheduled times throughout the year. All teachers of ELLs will be provided with staff development sessions, where the ENL teacher will provide the staff with techniques that will support ELLs in academic vocabulary development, ways to help ELLs with non-fiction reading and writing, assisting ELLs with the tasks that are present in the Common Core Learning Standards etc. There will be ongoing weekly meetings with the ENL teacher and classroom teachers to ensure curriculum alignment. Some topics that will be covered at professional development sessions for our staff are- -Workshops on key concepts in second language acquisition theory. - Workshops on best practices for teaching ELLs in the mainstream classroom. These best practices will be aligned with the Common Core State Standards. - Workshops on using technology to differentiate instruction. All general education and special education teachers attend ELL training sessions that are facilitated by the ELL teacher, that focus on academic strategies to use when teaching ELL students.These workshop hours are monitored by evaluating workshop sign-in sheets. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The staff at KAPPA III receive on-going staff development from our Generation Ready Consultant, Contracted vendors, ENL teacher and Bronx Field Support Center also provides workshops presented. These professional development sessions provide strategies and methods so that the ENL student can be included and participate in classroom lessons. Our Bronx Field Support Center is providing a series of ongoing professional development workshops that address strategies for English Language Learners as well as information and application of the Common Core Standards. These workshops invite both ENL and classroom teachers to attend. PD offerings from the Office of ELLs are communicated to all staff and new staff is encouraged to register. We make every accommodation necessary to promote professional learning for all teachers especially new teachers who are acquiring mandated training hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our ENL teacher will introduce himself using a syllabus. After reviewing all data, the ENL teacher will schedule individual conferences with the ELL parents to inform them about their child's current goals, language development progress and language performance on the previous year's exam. He will explain the program options and give parents the opportunity to make a selection. An action plan is discussed with all parents to ensure commitment to student learning. Translation services will be provided for any parent needing translation. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  One of the “Essential Features” that makes Kappa III unique is it’s parental/guardian compact and agreement to excellence. Our school relies on the commitment and support of parents to ensure that students meet high expectations. In doing so, we provide consistent parent meetings to maintain a relationship between the school and general program requirements for English Language Learners. The orientation will be conducted within the first month of school for newcomers to New York City public schools. This orientation will be provided by a school administrator, an ENL teacher and the parent coordinator. Forum will be some of the avenues to maintain consistent communication with our KAPPA III parents. All of the information shared with parents will be disseminated in the language they understand other than English. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Our ELL teacher and administration are tracking ELL progress and student success. There has been some progress of our ELL students moving up language levels and some have also reached language proficiency. We have aligned our curriculum and data which has allowed for greater success on the NYSESLAT, and for our students to become lifelong learners. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jean Colon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: KAPPA III School DBN: 12X316 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jean E Colon Title Principal Canchetta Temple-Hall Assistant Principal Juana Ovalles Parent Coordinator Rachel Malinari ENL/Bilingual Teacher Paulette Lyn Parent Christopher Mennell/ELA Teacher/Subject Area Detmer/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area Kristen Gripp Nicole Vairo Enlly Paulino Jacqueline Rosado Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 10/18/18 N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools School Name: KAPPA III Superintendent: Rafaela Espinal DBN: 12X316 The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Juana Pena Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. After examining the data reported in ats and the home language survey, we noted a high percentage of our students come from Spanish speaking families. During our parent orientation meetings, parents will complete a survey that includes the home language and if there is a need for a translator for home calls and or parent teacher conference. Based upon verbal input from classroom teachers, parent coordinator and administrators, we will provide translation and oral interpretation services for our Spanish, French and Creole speaking families to ensure proper communication with parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish French Creole Bengali 80 1 2 2 80 1 2 1 80 1 2 2 22 1 1 1 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. None Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Upon registration and filling out the Home Language Identification Survey, the home language will be determined, and the necessary documents that will be sent to the parent, will be translated by the Translation and Interpretation Unit. KAPPA III plans to provide ELL students with translated versions of: Parent Student Handbook, weekly chronicle(news letter), yearly calendar, progress reports, parent-teacher conference announcements, after-school programs, testing memos and all weekly correspondence. September 2018-June 2019 translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Documents that contain information critical for parents and their children's education will be translated into the covered languages. The school 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  will utilize DOE's Translation and Interpretation Unit. We will translate all documents that are backpacked home to students regularly such as our weekly newsletters for parents, monthly calendars, school events, Parent Teacher Association notices and school closures. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school We will hold our Meet and Greet in September. Our afternoon and evening student led conferences will be held on November 29 and March 6 and May . We hold several High School Articulation meetings for families in September and October. We will hold our Thanksgiving Lunch November 17, 2018. Multicultural Day May 17, 2019. Monthly PTA meetings and bi-weekly Workshops for parents will continue. Our parent engagement will continue on Tuesdays to keep families up to date on student performance and school events. September 2018-June 2019 plan to provide interpretation service(s)? During all of our events such as parent-teacher conferences in November, March and May, high school articulation 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  workshops in September and October, IEP conferences and weekly grade meetings throughout the school year, the school will use in-house staff members or hire oral translators to translate all information. The school will complete an interpretation request form and contact the Translation and Interpretation Unit of the DOE. The school staff will call the Translation and Interpretation unit of the DOE for any phone translation that is necessary. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. As per Chancellor's Regulation A-663, all staff at KAPPA III will provide timely written translations of all critical parent communication in the languages that match the student population of the school. DOE notices, school holidays, parent-teacher conferences are available in translation at the Translation and Interpretation Unit’s. We will contact the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit for languages not covered. To ensure all documents can be distributed at the same time as the English documents, all translations will be done in a timely manner. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the entrance of the main office, KAPPA III will place a Welcome Poster which will include the Parents' Bill of Rights and the Parents' Guide to Language Access. The parent coordinator will distribute copies to all students during our first week of orientation. We will also provide additional copies for all parents during our Meet and Greet session in September. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys, workshops and conferences will be used to identify satisfaction and future needs of language services. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76 
