2018-19 RISE SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (R-CEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X324 School Name: BRONX EARLY COLLEGE ACADEMY FOR TEACHING & LEARNING Principal: YVETTE RIVERA 2018-19 CEP-RISE 1  Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Rise School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Partnerships Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Bronx Early College Academy for Teaching and Learning 320900011324 6-12 250 East 164 Street Bronx, NY 10456 718 681 8287 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 09X324 718 681 8650 Fax: Yvette E. Rivera yrivera8@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 9 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Abigail Easton Yvette E. Rivera Ms. CorieGaidusek GailmarieSantiago Yvette E. Rivera MaribelGonzales TBD TBD District Information Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2 MetrotechCenter Brooklyn, NY 111201 malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-3071 Phone Number: 718-741-7685 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 3  District 9 FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Room 841 Executive Director’s Office Address: Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-5834 Phone Number: 718-741-7685 Fax: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective To guide, support and accelerate the early progress demonstrated by the schools graduating out of the Renewal program, as Rising Schools of Excellence (Rise), with a compelling theory of action, clear strategy for sustainment, targeted individualized supports, continued accountability, gradual release of responsibility, such that they independently accelerate their growth trajectory. Background Rise Schools have demonstrated: ● ● they have the will and conditions in place to accelerate student growth and meet school improvement benchmarks. they have the capacity to lead/implement a school improvement strategy. Rise Schools have seen some gains1 across multiple measures including graduation rates, college readiness, state test scores and attendance. As a result, these schools will fully transition out of the Renewal Schools program at the end of the 2017-2018 SY and continue under the guidance of the Office of Field Support, in partnership with the Office of School Support and Supervision. 1All Rise Schools met at least 67% of their benchmarks, are not on the State’s Priority list, and have demonstrated a sustainable school improvement structure that will allow them to build on their progress. Six Rise Keys for Continued Improvement 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. 4. Apply a tiered approach to student intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and Improve Data Driven Practices community partners Increase monitoring and accountability 6. Theory of Action If the NYC Department of Education provides customized supports to Rise schools and principals designed around the “Six Rise School Keys for continued improvement” then, Rise principals and their teams will have the tools and resources to accelerate outcomes for ALL students and increase students’ access to an excellent and equitable education. Structure of the Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Rise school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following: ● Rise Benchmarks: please refer to the 2018-19 Rise benchmarks provided to your school. ● Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and Rise through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Rise process. ● Setting mid-year point benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan. ● Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school. ● Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 5  ● Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards (NGLS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students. ● Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and the R-CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 6  The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the American Institute of Research (AIR) Needs Assessment, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools – they call it a Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All Priority and Focus Schools and Focus 2018-19 CEP-RISE 7  Districts must use the new tool; and districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Education Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:  a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 8 a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC)  It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the R-CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the R-CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for R-CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Rise school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Rise Key and the corresponding statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Discuss and respond to the guiding questions under each Framework element.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Rise Program Priorities Our Rise Theory of Action (page 4) is drawn from research1 on turnaround schools, the DOE Framework for Great Schools, DTSDE Tenets, and the Quality Review, which suggest that these key priorities have the greatest impact on student achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 9  RISE Keys Priorities 1. Strengthen the Instructional Core 2. Strengthen Instructional Leadership Capacity 3. Improve Data Driven Practices 4. Apply a tiered approach to school support and intervention 5. Promote a positive, inclusive school environment for students, staff, parents and community partners 6. Increase monitoring and accountability  A clear focus aligned to students’ instructional needs, including college and career readiness  Access to common, standards-based curricula for all students, including ELLs and SWDs  Explicit and intentional embedding of culturally responsive Instruction in all content areas  Formative and summative assessments for all students in all grades that are aligned to curricula and produce clear evidence of learning  Tiered approach to teacher professional learning opportunities.  Partnership with families to increase engagement in students’ academic success  Implementation of a coherent vision for school improvement - a vision for leading learning, leading people, leading schools and leading change  Development of a system to support distributive leadership and build the capacity and sustainability of teacher leaders through continuous improvement  Developing leadership competencies, specific to turnaround efforts, including leveraging multiple stakeholders, a commitment to student learning and a sustained pursuit of measurable progress. Strategic allocation of resources to support instructional and professional learning plans and family engagement in leadership opportunities Integrative use of formative and summative assessment tools and practices to target resources and support throughout the year to achieve academic priorities    Ongoing analyses of school-wide and student-level data and adjustments to curricular resources and instructional moves  Prioritization of the use of standards and data to inform teaching and learning    Implementation of a tiered intervention system that engages teacher teams in frequent cycles of progress monitoring and adjustments to address diverse student needs School establishes coherent system, adopted by all to ensure that interventions are effective, differentiated and timely Increased use of teacher teams’ data-driven practices to accelerate student achievement  Clear strategy that establishes social norms within the school community and promotes a culture for learning with clear and high expectations for all students, in partnership with CBOs.  The sustainability of an environment where students feel safe, connected and engaged through practices that are culturally relevant and build their scholarly identity  The development of a whole school approach, in partnership with families, with   specific attention to social, physical and behavioral environments Social emotional learning practices embedded in teaching and learning as aligned to the Collaborative for Academic, Social and Emotional learning (CASEL) competencies and supported by CBOs. School leaders implement effective monitoring systems to ensure that instructional practices and interventions are monitored closely at the classroom, team, and school wide level  Establish effective teacher team practices that ensure teachers are accountable for data findings and set timely and appropriate interventions  Data analysis results in adjustments to the programs and priorities to better service   students Foster positive systems for accountability driven by reflection and action planning Support from district leaders to focus efforts toward results and problem solving actions that lead to turnaround success. 1. Darden/Curry PLE – Turnaround Leadership Competencies and Turnaround Action Shown to Influence Student Achievement 2018-19 CEP-RISE 10  Achievement Network – SY 18-19 Foundations Rubric COSEBOC Standards and Promising Practices for Schools Educating Boys of Color Harvard Graduate School of Education and Harvard Business School: Certificate in School Management and Leadership Learner-Centered Initiatives Multidimensional Principal Performance Rubric Monitoring and Accountability ● Rise schools will be monitored for implementation of the Rise Comprehensive Educational Plan (R+CEP) by Superintendents and Office of Field Support. ● Rise schools will be held accountable for making progress according to annual targets set by the Department of Education, as evidenced by their attainment of named benchmark scores for each annualized key metric. Schools not achieving annual targets by June 2019 are subject to additional oversight and consequences, to be determined at a later date. ● OFS will bring increased oversight and accountability by monitoring FSC supports to schools and ensure that these are aligned with the school’s instructional focus, student and teacher needs, and moving the school toward achieving interim goals. ● OSSS will monitor DSR oversight of all supports to Rise Schools. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 11  Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Rise School Comprehensive Educational Plan (R-CEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the R-CEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Yvette E. Rivera CorieGaidusek MaribelGonzalez Marlene Gabriel Gladys Hodge Abigail Easton Mark Grant EmelynInfante Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 12  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AishaIvie Veronica Saunders JorgeBetanzos AdishaWashington X X X X X Parent Parent Staff Staff Parent Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor 2018-19 CEP-RISE 13  Section 4: Rise School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Rise school addressing the following and please use existing data, where applicable: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. 2. 3. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as partners in furthering student achievement 4. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and your Rise Benchmarks and indicate where this has been a challenge. 5. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Bronx Early College Academy for Teaching & Learning (“BECA”), located in the Morrisania section of the South Bronx, was founded in 2006 as an Early College program serving students in grades 6 through 12. BECA has maintained a four year graduation rate of 90% over the last five years. BECA’s four-year graduation rate continues to be significantly higher than both the Borough and Citywide four-year graduation averages due to the strategic decision making of an effective school leader as well as the dedication and professionalism of our entire BECA community. Our beliefs about student learning are embodied by our Mission Statement. Secondary school is an experience filled with challenges, opportunities, and a time of discovery on so many levels. At BECA, the Principal, school leaders, faculty, partners, families, and staff provides our students with the learning, guidance, discipline, enrichment, and organization necessary for students to feel successful at school. Mission Statement At Bronx Early College Academy, we strive to develop a community of principled citizens, students, families, staff, and community partners who commit to preparing all students to participate in the International Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma Program. ∙ We believe that all students have the freedom to pursue their passions and curiosities as they learn to take personal responsibility for their own learning. ∙ We engage imagination, encourage reflection, and nurture students’ thinking to embrace a sense of international mindedness. ∙ We commit to developing students who have the skills, knowledge, and character necessary to take action in caring for themselves and others. ∙ We strive to achieve balance between academics, individual creativity, and an urgency to be of service to others. Through their experiences at BECA, our students will be prepared, empowered, and enlightened to access superior post-secondary opportunities and successfully navigate an increasingly complex world. In honoring the Framework for Great Schools, several examples of effective school leadership are observable throughout our school. For example, school leaders are committed to students’ success both at the secondary and post-secondary levels. The Principal acts strategically to secure great partnerships for the school community beginning with The College Bound Initiative (“CBI”). CBI provides students and families with individualized services in preparation for the academic, personal, and financial rigors of accessing post-secondary environments. As a school community, we recognize the importance of providing our students with post-secondary opportunities and career readiness. We also recognize that thoughtful and supportive guidance throughout the entire 6 -12 continuum are particularly important, especially as students’ transition to post secondary environments during senior year. CBI in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 14  collaboration with families and staff provide opportunities for our students to plan for the next phase in their lives under the expertise and guidance of our partner CBI and our professional faculty. In keeping with our mission of providing students with enriching educational experiences, rigorous curriculum and instruction, and in alignment with the Framework for Great Schools, BECA underwent a two-year, highly rigorous application and site visit verification process to become authorized as an International Baccalaureate (“IB”) World School. BECA was authorized to offer the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program in October 2013. BECA is one of a few NYCDOE public high schools authorized to offer the IB Diploma Program. We achieved this milestone thanks to our dedicated, strategic, and supportive leadership, professional environment of trust and collaboration, and a commitment by all stakeholders towards academic improvement. Our current IB students recently completed the first administration of IB Diploma Program examinations in Literature (HL), Math Studies (SL), History (HL), Biology (SL) Spanish (SL), and Film (HL). Our work towards international mindedness includes various efforts to provide students with an overseas educational experience to expand their learning beyond the classroom. With the support of our Superintendent, we have had students visit Spain and other countries to engage in a cultural and language immersion experience. Our inclusive, motivating, and rigorous curriculum works in perfect partnership with the expectations of the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom and students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. This tremendous achievement could not have been possible in the record time it was achieved, especially given the challenges facing BECA had it not been for effective leadership, a community of collaborative teachers, families, community partnerships, and our students who continuously rise to the challenge. This, and more of the great strides BECA continues to attain are possible by an environment of trust. At BECA, we work toward improving student outcomes, while preparing students for success beyond school. At BECA, we care, respect, and value one another. According to the 2018 School Quality Snapshot, 96% of parents reported that teachers and families think of each other as partners in educating their children. The School Principal brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families and community-based organizations. As a group of highly collaborative and professional educators, we are continuously striving to expand our instructional capabilities and innovate in our classrooms to provide additional opportunities at our school. The recognition of our partner organizations who continue to place their confidence in our school has been an amazing experience for BECA. As mentioned earlier, CBI is a key partnership for both our students and families in cultivating a strong college and career readiness culture. Our partnerships, over the years, provide our students and families with many programs spanning from resume writing and job services, college trips as well as additional linkages to community based organizations. BECA has made great progress in establishing community partners including a vibrant partnership with American Museum of Natural History Masters in Teaching Program. After a rigorous vetting, BECA was selected as one of only three NYCDOE partner school sites to train the Museum’s Earth and Space Science teaching residents under the guidance of BECA’s own Science teachers. Our families are provided with enhanced access to the museum including special exhibits and family programming for free. Our students and families are provided with greater access to special student, family programs and internship opportunities at the museum. As a result of the Mayor’s and Chancellor’s initiative to provide afterschool programs in middle schools across the city, BECA has partnered with City Year. BECA’s City Year team includes a dedicated on-site Program Manager, Team Leader, and an After school SONYC Manager as well as ten AmeriCorps Corps Members. The City Year Team is on-site from 7:30-5:30pm pushing into our classrooms in grades 6th-8th providing additional support and small group tutoring in core classes to targeted students based on individual needs. Immediately following the regular school day, the City Year Team provides afterschool programming in both academics and enrichment five days a week. Programming includes homework help, physical fitness, and enrichment activities. In addition to the expanded learning opportunities described above, Saturday school was available for students in grades 6-8 to hone skills in both English Language Art and Mathematics as well as for students in HS to practice subject specific skills in content areas aligned to NYS Regents assessments. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 15  Over the years, BECA has developed into an environment where other professionals aspire to learn the art and science of dedicated pedagogy. As such, two of our strategic partnerships are the New York City Teaching Collaborative and the American Museum of Natural History Masters in Teaching Program. We will continue to provide our students with a disciplined, yet nurturing environment to enhance their overall intellectual and personal development. One of our most ardent overarching goals is to bridge equity and access for our students by providing them with all the advantages possible in public education. Given the shared commitment of our staff, the appropriate time, institutional support, and our continued hard work, we have no doubt that together as a community, we will be able to weather the challenges and continue to build a school where every child feels successful. As a RISE School, we will expand implementation of the following school improvement strategies during this school year: ∙ Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during after school and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners City Year for grades 6-8 and Center for Supportive Schools. ∙ Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in school. Our partner in this goal, Morris Heights Health Center School Based Center provides a full range of wellness and mental health services to students. ∙ Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students ∙ Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement We will also undergo a comprehensive needs assessment across all six elements of the Capacity Framework (rigorous instruction, collaborative teachers, supportive environment, effective school leadership, strong family-community ties, and trust) to inform the development of our School Renewal Plans for the 2018-19 school year. As a result of our needs assessment and goals for the year, our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year is: If teachers engage in collaborative, structured conversations around student work pieces to determine students’ needs and strengths, then students will be provided with targeted and scaffolded support that will improve their academic achievement. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X324 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 522 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 21 21 17 8 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 49 38 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 84.1% % Reduced Lunch 12.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 68.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.08 3% 34% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 25.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 86% 74% 77.2% 1.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YSH N/A YSH YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 35 45 2 92.2% 2.9% 19.0% 26.4% 2.9% 0.8% 2 53% 7.7 14.5% 14% 84% 81% 96.7% 20% N/A No Yes YES N/A N/A YSH YSH NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 CEP-RISE 17  2018-19 CEP-RISE 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. (aligned to Rise Keys 2 and 6) Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. (aligned to Rise Key 3) SOP(s) Addressed X x x x 3.3 3.4 3.5 The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. (aligned to Rise Keys 1 and 4) Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. (aligned to Rise Key 1) Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? In accordance with the Framework for Great Schools, and Tenet 2 of DTSDE, (School Leader Practices and Decisions) several examples of effective school leadership are observable throughout our school. For example, across grades, unit planners are designed by the school leader to include “Significant Concepts”, Common Core Learning Standards, International Baccalaureate Assessment Criteria, Danielson key elements, Reading and Literacy indicators, Learning Resources, Culminating Task, Connections to the IB Learner Profile, Planning for multiple entry points, Assessment Criteria and Data Collection. Each unit plan is uploaded to Google Docs to undergo a three-stage process for review and feedback from administrators and a coach. Example of feedback comments noted on unit plans ranged from, “Please reword ‘Significant Concepts’ as per my comment;” to “Much of this unit is strong, However, the language, especially in the significant concepts and questions, are very challenging. Please see notes, and revise where required.” Tenets 3 & 4 (Curriculum Development & Support; Teacher Practices and Decisions) are addressed as teachers are required to purposefully note in unit plans whether or not students are meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards in response to stage 3 of our unit planners: “What evidence in student work products demonstrated the learning objectives, and which concepts for teaching were in alignment to specific Common Core Learning Standards.” Teachers also are required to consistently describe if students, in their focus, impact and target groups, (grades 6-8) demonstrated mastery of the concepts and skills necessary for meeting the demands of college and career readiness. Our collaborative teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their class and schools, and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 19  create meaningful unit planners and curriculum maps, look at data and student work as a team, and work towards helping students achieve mastery. Teachers are at different stages of creating opportunities for interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Our English department has consistently led this charge by partnering with LEAP on Stage where our students engaged in original play writing, all aspects of production, and performance. For the last two years, one of our students has had has a play published by Samuel French and performed on Broadway. We look for additional opportunities to successfully create authentic interdisciplinary curricula. DATA Scholarship Reports Student work products such as student formative benchmarking in ELA and Math Principal and teacher leader created unit planner template Teacher created Common Core Aligned unit plans and maps Principal and peer Feedback on teacher created unit planners Professional Development Plan Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? BECA underwent a two year, highly rigorous application and site visit verification process to become authorized as an International Baccalaureate (“IB”) World School. BECA was successful in becoming authorized to offer the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program in October 2013. BECA is one of the few NYC public high schools authorized to offer the IB Diploma Program. We achieved this milestone thanks to our dedicated, strategic, and supportive leadership, a professional environment of trust and collaboration, and a commitment by all stakeholders towards academic improvement. Our first IB students recently completed the first administration of IB Diploma Program examinations in Literature (SL), Math Studies (SL), History (SL), Biology (SL), and Spanish (SL/HL), Film (SL/HL). Deliberate attention to scaffolding for all students includes deliberate attention by teachers during the design of unit planners and then an organized reflection of the same based on student work products from said planners. Multiple entry points are supported in the same fashion. Instructional shifts are evident in the expectations and requirements of participation. Our school requirements exceed that of the State for graduation. For example, students are expected to take at least three years of World Language even though this is not supported at the State level. Additionally, all HS students are provided with opportunities to take four years of Mathematics and Sciences even though the State only required three years. During expanded learning time, students will have an added opportunity to develop themselves further in the study core subjects and delve deeper in such areas as laboratory work in STEM subjects, research methodology in the Social Sciences and Humanities, expanded experiences in the Arts. Other opportunities will be provided based on analysis of student data and other factors. Consistency be ensured and supported across school faculty and community educators and across a longer learning day by programming these experiences as an extension of the learning that transpires 2018-19 CEP-RISE 20  during the day and not as an add-on. Additionally, there will be very deliberate messaging of shared goals to all constituencies of the school community so as to inform and reinforce the importance of participation. Pedagogy will look like a set of coherent practices around classrooms connected to school-wide focus standards and focus instructional practices. This is facilitated through a school-wide delivery of instruction based on how we believe students learn best. All classrooms utilize our school-wide Daily Routine for Unfolding Instruction (“DRUI”) and it includes the following components: Guiding Question, Common Core Learning Standard (or Next Generation Science, NYLS where CCLS does not exist), Mini-lesson, Task, Assessment, Homework. Teachers have multiple opportunities to engage students in different parts of the lesson to support individualized instruction adapted to our student needs. Interaction among students with their peers and classroom teachers allows staff and students alike to formatively assess whether our students have acquired the content and skills necessary to be successful and move on to the next task. Teachers use multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child. Teachers give deliberate attention to the design of unit planners to develop them further to ensure access to every child at multiple points in the lesson. Unit planners are organized to reflect multiple entry points, and have designated areas on the planners for teachers to incorporate these points into their lessons. Consistency throughout the day is supported through pedagogical practices such as the DRUI, integrated lesson plans, focus on the Common Core Learning standards, collaboration among teachers, professional development, and creating a supportive environment for students and teachers. In grades 6-10, our professional development sessions focus reading and writing strategies (from the NYC writing project), to build multiple entry points to lessons across disciplines. Teachers use the performance outcome data from Measures of Student Learning assessments, New York State and Common Core exam, teacher-designed assessments using Test Wizard and Gradecam to disaggregate and assess students’ mastery of identified Common Core Learning and/or content standards as well as the International Baccalaureate Learner Profiles for curricular revisions or re-teach content and provide corrective instruction for students as needed. For example, baseline data in one math class revealed 5 of 28 students in 6 th grade demonstrated some mastery of, “applying and extending previous understanding of multiplying and dividing fractions by fractions.” Units and lesson plans were revised to re-teach the standards with scaffolds built in to support comprehension of content. Interim reassessment of the same standards for the same students garnered a 25% increase in performance. Teachers use the New York State and International Baccalaureate assessments to determine students’ performance of levels. Students’ assessment outcomes are categorized on a scale of high, medium and low. (75-100% high mastery, 50-74.9% medium, 0-49.9% low). Students’ performance outcomes are then purposefully used in classrooms to create heterogeneous groups for teaching and learning. Students are taught to support each other with the solving of problems and comprehension of content. To ensure our teachers are developing and using standardized, coherent, and innovative practices, teachers use lesson study protocols to facilitate inter-visitation cycles across grade levels and disciplines. These cycles consist of classroom visits, student work analysis and peer reflections. We will provide students with enhanced learning opportunities for students to have hands on and real life experiences, both in and out of the classroom environment. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 21  How will you implement a standards-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, including ELLs and SWDs? Teachers will align all curricula, units, and lessons with CCLS. Through the use of formative and summative assessments, along side classroom anecdotals as teachers get to know their students, teachers will be able to differentiate their instruction based on students needs, both emotional, cultural, and academic. This will allow classes to personalize instruction through the use of CCLS aligned curricula, by building strong questioning and discussion that allows student choice, critical thinking, scaffolded instruction, and character development embedded within lessons and units of instruction. Lesson plans will be scaffolded to meet the needs of all learners, building from where the students present levels are to higher levels of thinking. Teachers will use rubrics, and have students self assess to build their own self awareness and accountability. The school's partnership with the CBO, Center for Supportive schools, will build on mentoring and character development to support students' personal and academic growth. What is your vision for ensuring that all student have access to rigorous coursework that moves them towards career and college readiness? How will you support the personal and academic skills, habits, and behaviors needed for students to be career and college ready? The IB program will embed the learner profile in all middle school classes. Students in 8th grade will have the opportunity to take regents level course for science, while High School students have the opportunity to participate in the IB program to build college and career readiness skills. All students will be exposed to college and career readiness skills through rigorous instruction in their daily classes, through critical thinking questioning and discussion, student led discussions, intensives that allow for student choice, exposure to real world careers, research projects, and interdisciplinary curricula. Instructional shifts are embedded within daily lesson plans, units and curricula. Specifically, this will be evident in teachers' plans through questioning, activities, and alignment between lesson objectives, activities and assessment. How do you envision embedding the elements of culturally responsive instruction and how will you know that implementation is successful? Lessons will be structured to provide students with rigorous instruction to prepare them for college and careers. This will include clear alignment between curriculum maps, unit plans, and lesson plans. Lesson plans will have alignment between the objective, mini lesson, activity, and assessment. The checks for understanding will allow teachers to formatively assess where students are and make necessary changes to differentiate instruction for students based on each individuals needs. Teachers will utilize feedback provided to them during observations and walk-through's to address the needs of their students, and ensure that instruction is directly aligned to the needs of their students, while maintaining a high level of rigor aligned to the school's vision. Daily instruction will include scaffolds, differentiation, a mini lesson, whole group instruction, small group and individual instruction varied by the needs of the students based on data, and utilize data to drive instruction and provide teachers with necessary information to properly group students with in the classroom, and to provide scaffolds and differentiation based on data. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 22  What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Teachers will include multiple entry points through the use of technology, hands on activities, reading, writing, and varied activities planned based on the needs of their students. Through data driven instruction teachers will vary activities in class, provide students with verbal explanations, written directions, pictures, and hands on work through out their units to address various learning styles. Teachers will maintain high levels of expectations for students and plan units that incorporate multiple entry points. All disciplines will incorporate reading and writing literacy standards. Through the use of data teachers will be able to determine what their students learning styles are and what their levels and needs are. Through the use of technology, computers, research projects, online programs and activities students will be able to have a vast array of learning experiences with in the classroom that address their different learning styles. Through whole group, small group and one one on instruction, with the support of City Year, and the CBO we will be able to provide multiple entry points in the classroom. Teaching strategies will address the needs of our growing ELL population, questioning, scaffolds to address students' needs. Projects will allow for student choice to build on multiple entry points, including scaffolds for shrugging students and extensions for higher functioning students. How do you envision differentiating teacher professional learning opportunities to support instructional foci, meet students’ unique needs and advance culturally responsive education in your school? Teachers receive differentiated mentoring in different learning models according to their developmental progress. For example, teachers in years 1-2 receive 1:1 mentoring as well as second year induction. While teachers with 5+ years of experience who have demonstrated superior student outcomes might lead some of that mentoring, participate in a PLC learning community, and/or lead a team. Teacher teams provide a learning venue to focus on vertical instructional goals as well as the particular learning, social, and emotional needs of a set number of students. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all 8th grade Math teachers will participate in professional coaching with Blue Engine to increase the number of 8th grade students who sit for the NYS Algebra Regent examination. A target of 10% of 8th grade students sitting for the Algebra Regent in June 2019 will pass the exam and earn two, commencement level credits in Algebra. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of RISE Benchmarks expected to improve Improvement and growth in ELA state test scores Improvement and growth in Math state test scores Maintain and increase graduation rate 2018-19 CEP-RISE 23  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Two year comparative analysis of targeted CCLS assessment performance as measured by NYSCC Assessments in ELA and Math in grades 6-8. Detailed Formative Assessment Plan, corrective instruction, and revised curriculum maps in response to findings from activities related to formative assessment plan. Increase student participation in the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program (“IB”) by use of the IB learner profile and IB criteria in high school. Weekly professional development focused on Inquiry and student work products related to (HS) and review of Formative Assessment Plan work products and next steps (MS) Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Grades 6-8 ELA and Math Benchmarks Summer 2019 Principal, Coach, AP, DSR, Center for Supportive Schools Grades 6-8 ELA and Math Benchmarks - iReady 2018-2019 School Year Principal, Coach, AP, DSR, Center for Supportive Schools, Grades 6-12 ALL 2018-2019 School Year Principal, Coach, AP, DSR, Center for Supportive Schools Grades 6-12 ELA and Math Benchmarks 2018-2019 School Year Principal, Coach, AP, DSR, Center for Supportive Schools, teacher leaders, teachers and departments How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increased growth in students scores Increased growth in students scores Increased growth in students scores on state exams and Regents pass rate. Increase number of students participating successfully in the IB program. Increased growth in students scores on state exams and Regents pass rate 2018-19 CEP-RISE 24  including, but not limited to: literacy strategies embedded in lessons, units, and curriculum maps, creation of said units and maps, inter visitations by teachers to observe strategies in action, and inquiry teams. Professional development cycles geared towards building project and choice based learning opportunities into core content classes and enhanced learning opportunities. 6-12 ELA and Math 2018-2019 school year Principal, AP, Coach, DSR, content area teachers, teacher leaders Increased growth in students scores in state and Regents exams, as well as the college and career readiness index 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. BECA maintains online licenses of multiple web based software to support students at home and to allow families to access progress made against NYS standards. iready - provides online support in ELA and Math in grades 6-9 allowing parents to access student progress in real time. Students work on both ELA and Math activities for a 45 minutes per week or more. ELA and Math teachers monitor progress and Special Education Coordinator provides general oversight. Kinvolved - supports text-based communication with families and provides parents with a class to class accounting of attendance each day. Parent coordinator and Community School Director provide general oversight. Classroom teachers provide daily attendance data. Skedula - Provides support for daily grades, homework, behavior though an APP as well as via email for each class. Dean of School Culture maintains oversight. School Website - provides support to families via linkage to various organizations, calendar updates, external programming, and other important information. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 25  Funding for incentive trips and family activities Appropriate staffing to meet the requirements of action plan Translation Services School Website to Broaden Access to Public Various Marketing Materials to Increase Communication Coaches to oversee day to day proper implementation of action plan Funding for field trips and supplies for enhanced learning opportunities Funding for Professional development and specialized training Funding for benchmark assessment needs, including supplies and programs such as gradecam, Managebac, Questia, Turnitin, Kinvolved, and similar programs IB annual and teacher training fees including testing fees and professional development for staff and administration Technology (hardware and software) to increase access to online programs and assessments Funding for additional Saturday/after school academic supports Student incentives for attendance and performance Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School-wide Attendance Rate (ATS REPORT RSAL) · Individual Student Attendance Rate Comparison (ATS REPORT RMAO) · Student Feedback with Guidance Team · Weekly Attendance Meeting Framework for Great Schools Data indicators 2018-19 CEP-RISE 26  Family Feedback Intake Guidance intervention and targeted counseling check-in New Visions Check-ins Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. New Visions Tool Skedula Managebac Turn-it in Kinvolved Other web-based programs as needed In-house assessment benchmarks and data District Public Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. (aligned to Rise Key 5) 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. (aligned to Rise Key 5) x X x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strength · Targeted tone and discipline to help support a safe learning environment based on the International Implementation of Baccalaureate Learner Profile · Leap Onstage to integrate the Arts and promote students creativity and voice Strategic partnerships with the College Bound Initiative and the American Museum of Natural History · Four members of staff dedicated to the socio-emotional support of students and families · Support from Attendance Teacher · Weekly Attendance Team Meetings · Uniform policy to enhance culture of inclusion into our family 2018-19 CEP-RISE 28  · School Messenger and Skedula to regularly communicate with families On-going and consistent collaboration with SBST and campus community clinic Data · ATS Attendance Reports (RSAL, RMAO, RDAL, RISA, RPYA) · Regular conferences with Guidance Department and Teacher Teams · City Year Data Need · Increase attendance participation rates for students who have been absent 20 days or more · Highlight improvements in student attendance rates · Increase parent, staff and student awareness of attendance expectations Student led virtual enterprise Family incentive outings Team/Community building activities/events for students and families Implement peer mentoring programs/advisory programs Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you, in partnership with each CBO and families, enact your vision? In collaboration with Center for Supportive Schools we will be able to provide our students with a positive, social, emotional, and academic school experience. CSS will help our empower our teachers to be mentors to our at risk students, and provide them with the necessary tools to also empower our students to mentor each other. Through mentoring between students and teachers, we will build a school environment that allows students to realize that they can impact the school positively, with teachers serving as mentors building a culture of support and intervention. This will also include outreach to students' families and the community, thereby building the overall school community. Describe your plan to implement a culture of trust and high expectations for teachers, students, families and community partners. Emphasis on a collaborative and inclusive environment promotes high expectations for the entire community. A rigorous instructional program, which includes the International Baccalaureate Diploma, International Baccalaureate Career Certificate Program, and a CTE program is the basis for high expectations for student, teachers, families, and community partners. Families and students are further supported by ELT, linkage to external organizations such as Astor, and on an ongoing basis by our Community School Director. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 29  Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Center for Supportive Schools Mentoring, College Career Readiness, an additional Social Worker, ELT programming, trips CBO Focus N/A N/A How will you, in partnership with your CBO, create a supportive and engaging environment for your students’ families? The CBO will provide a mentoring program for teachers to mentor students and students to then mentor other students through their achievement mentoring program. They will have tutoring for students, customized solutions to support the needs of our students, a student and family advisory, and prevention and intervention program to reduce problem behaviors and improve academics. An additional Social worker will be provided via our allocation for Mental Health via Counseling in Schools. What essential questions, or key themes, will be explored by all staff and students that acknowledge and celebrate the culture and heritage of the student body? The International Baccalaureate Program is an internationally recognized program, with an emphasis in pedagogy that is includes local and international events. Parent and community forums, student talent shows, student virtual enterprise. What evidence will you use to gauge the impact of your plan to create a positive school environment? Data from student and family surveys. Participation rates in IB programs, student driven activities. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, our school's supportive staff which includes Parent Coordinator, Community School Director, Community School Associate, Counselors, Social Workers and Partner; Center for Supportive Schools will collaborate weekly to engage in success mentoring, family out-reach, as well as individual and group counseling to reduce the number of Severely Chronically Absent students by 3% as measured by the New Visions Tracker tool. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of RISE Benchmarks expected to improve We will increase our attendance by continuous monitoring and outreach. Provide students with mentoring for emotional and academic needs. Provide students with social and emotional supports 2018-19 CEP-RISE 30  2018-19 CEP-RISE 31  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. International Baccalaureate Diploma Program (“IBDP”) core courses will be offered. In addition, we will be adding one additional IBDP course Computer Programming will be offered. IBDP teachers will meet regularly to plan, ensure the success of their students and assess courses offered. Additional opportunities will be created to broaden counseling and linkage services to a larger variety of students and families. In addition to our 2 Social Workers, full time Director of College Counseling, a replacement SAPIS counselor will be added to the counseling staff. Our partnership with College Bound Initiative additional outreach to families and students. CBI involves parents in workshops as well. A more diverse range of family workshops and opportunities to support their understanding of rigorous instruction, the Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 6-12 Increased attendance Increased pass and graduation rates through out the year 2018-2019 School Year Team Leaders, IB Coordinator, Teachers, Guidance Counselors and Principal 6-12 Increased attendance in school and school events 2018-2019 School Year Provide students with mentoring for emotional and academic needs. CSP, CSD, Morris School Based Health Program, Guidance Counselors, Director of College Counseling, How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increased growth in students scores on state exams and Regents pass rate. Increase number of students participating successfully in the IB program. College Acceptances Scholarship 6-12 Increased attendance in school and school events 2018-2019 School Year Principal, IB Coordinator, AP, Director of College Counseling, Guidance Counselors Teachers, and CSP Staff Increased scores on regents and state exams. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 32 Provide students with mentoring for emotional and academic needs Provide students with social and emotional supports to meet all our students' needs College Acceptances Scholarship Common Core, the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program, International Baccalaureate Career Certificate Program and College and Career Readiness to support their children at home. Alternative Parent Nights will be utilized, as well as Parent Meetings for students in the Diploma Program, and outreach to parents made by the Parent Coordinator as well as teachers and our community partner,Center for Supportive Schools. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We have created a school-wide referral system, which we will introduce to the staff in September 2018. The system's goal is to capture the needs of students beyond academic in order to provide them with more timely and cohesive services. Other stakeholders involved are our Mental Health manager, Community School Director, Parent Coordinator, ENL and Sped. Coordinators, and teachers. The Clinical Guidance team will provide oversight in consultation with the Principal. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. · Department and Grade Team Leaders, Administrators · Dean of School Culture, Teacher Coaches. · Teachers · Guidance Counselor and Social Worker · Funding associated with physical plant improvements, branding, and related items to foster a supportive and welcoming environment · Funding for Expanded Learning Time 2018-19 CEP-RISE 33  · Funding International Diploma Program Annual Fee and Student Assessments · International Baccalaureate Training · Additional counseling services, professionals, and programs Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title III PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Attendance rate will exceed 85%. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance Monitoring New Visions Check-ins Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. (aligned to Rise Key 2) 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. (aligned to Rise Key 1) 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. (aligned to Rise Key 4) 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). (aligned to Rise Key 3) x x x X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Grade level teacher teams meet to discuss the academic performance of target, impact and focus groups. Group goals are identified by the Common Core and or content standards students must master, based on the grade level curriculum. Interim data is compared to baseline data in content areas to identify students’ progress. For example, teachers used an excel spreadsheet to log the math and English performance ratings, levels and growth rate of their ELLs and SPEDs populations. Discussions by teachers on specific skills students did or did not master became the foundation for revising units, lesson plans, instructional tools, and/or creating a re-teaching plan. Teachers’ shared student achievement outcomes, which showed ELLs and SWDs making academic progress in math and English. Teacher teams systemically review student work and administrative feedback to inform teaching practices. Teachers have expressed that looking at students’ work products often resulted in a change of classroom practices. The practices that were informed were the following: increasing time for students to have content discussions in science; allowing students to own their own notes in mathematics, increasing student-centered opportunities in social studies, and reassessing groupings in English. These changes in practice were considered as steps needed to improve student learning . Teachers are required to purposefully note the following in unit plans to ensure students are provided with multiple entry points and meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Intentionally noted in plans, teachers also consistently described if students, in their focus, impact and target groups, demonstrated mastery of the concepts and skills necessary for meeting the demands of college and career readiness. Teacher planners are provided with written feedback from either the Instructional coach and/or the Principal. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 35  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Teachers meet in and work in collaborative teams. Pedagogy looks like a set of coherent practices around classrooms connected to school-wide focus standards and focus instructional practices. This is facilitated through a school-wide delivery of instruction based on how we believe students learn best. All classrooms utilize our school-wide Daily Routine for Unfolding Instruction (“DRUI”) and it includes the following components: Guiding Question, Common Core Learning Standard (or Next Generation Science, NYLS where CCLS does not exist), Mini-lesson, Task, Assessment, Homework. Teachers have multiple opportunities to engage students in different parts of the lesson to support individualized instruction adapted to our student needs. Interaction among students with their peers and classroom teachers allows staff and students alike to formatively assess whether our students have acquired the content and skills necessary to be successful and move on to the next task. Deliberate attention to scaffolding for all students includes deliberate attention by teachers during the design of unit planners and then an organized reflection of the same based on student work products from said planners. Teachers review student work products in teams to ensure that they plan for individual needs. Multiple entry points are supported in the same fashion. Instructional shifts are evident in the expectations and requirements of participation. Teachers are provided with multiple opportunities both by structured PD, grade and discipline level meetings to collaborate on units and lessons. BECA also has a school wide Google Doc where teachers can access additional units for teachers who do not sit on either a grade or discipline level team. Planners are provided with written feedback. Teachers use the performance outcome data from Measures of Student Learning assessments, New York State and Common Core exam, teacher-designed assessments using Test Wizard and Gradecam to disaggregate and assess students’ mastery of identified Common Core Learning and/or content standards as well as the International Baccalaureate Learner Profiles for curricular revisions or reteach content. Students’ performance outcomes are then purposefully used in classrooms to create heterogeneous groups for teaching and learning. Students are taught to support each other with the solving of problems and comprehension of content. In an effort to improve student outcomes and engineer successful teaching and learning conditions during the school day and extended learning time, both partners will work collaboratively at implementing a clear system for progress monitoring by: (1) studying baseline data on all students’ progress and identifying which students require Tier 1, 2 and/or 3 interventions (2) determining the precise targets, level, skills and strategies that student require to develop mastery. Teachers should and will review student work collaboratively in teams, and give feedback on assessments, and discuss needs and progress of students. A cycle of Professional Development will be dedicated to inter-visitation, reviewing student work as a team, and protocols for looking at students work and giving feedback will be part of the cycle. Our partnerships with the Museum of Natural History, and City Year all provide opportunities for a collaborative teaching approach, as participants are in the classrooms, supporting students and teachers, providing instruction and working of programs for the benefit of students. How do you envision enhancing collaboration amongst your Instructional Leadership Team to improve teacher practices and student learning? The school instructional cabinet will observe teacher practices to determine strengths and weaknesses. Next we will use this data to identify key professional development necessities to build teacher practices and student learning. Teachers will also receive regular actionable feedback on their teaching practices. New teachers will have their mentors to support in the building of their teacher practices. The cabinet will have meeting to review data, identify areas of growth and need, and determine next steps to further improve teacher practice. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 36  How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teacher teams will work together to uphold a clearly aligned grading policy, discipline and behavioral expectations policy, and ensure that best practices are continuously shared amongst teachers to build on them. Teachers will work in their teams to make sure there is clear alignment, rigor, and high expectations with in each discipline and grade, and that those expectations follow through amongst all teachers on the team. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve data driven teacher practices that result in improvement in student achievement? What data will teachers and the Instructional Leadership Team regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon needed adjustments to teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? Data Reviewed Student work Determine students needs, areas of growth and areas of improvement by teacher/subject/grade. Intent Teacher Observations Identify teacher's strengths and weaknesses to determine necessary supports Assessment data Monitor student and teacher growth Describe the screening process you use to identify students who need extra help? How do you use this process to determine which intervention to provide? We have a school-wide formative assessment program, administered four times per year. Teachers adjust curricula and students identified as needing additional supports are provided with small group instruction during the school day and ELT. IReady also provides us with data to identify students in need of additional intervention. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, all teachers in HS will implement a department-wide instructional strategy (such as formative assessment) to increase students' capacity to demonstrate mastery of Regent's aligned tasks; resulting in a 5% increase from the previous year for students passing three Regents by the end of 10th grade (Cohort W). Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal? List of RISE Benchmarks expected to improve 15% of developing Teacher's will earn an MOTP rating of "Effective in 2D, 3C, and 3D. Teachers will participate in inquiry through their grade/discipline teams. Teachers will have inter visitations at least three times during the year. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 37 Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Teachers Increased percentage of teachers receiving an "effective" rating 2018-2019 School Year Teachers will participate in inquiry through their grade/discipline teams. Eligible Staff and CSP, CSD Increased test score data Decreased number of incidents/suspensions Teachers and Students Increased percentage of teachers receiving an "effective" rating 2018-2019 School Year Guidance Counselors, Teachers, and Administration Teachers will participate in inquiry through their grade/discipline teams. Increased test score data Increased use of data driven instruction All classrooms utilizing differentiation strategies Teachers Increased percentage of teachers receiving an "effective" rating 2018-2019 School Year Administration, Coaches Teacher ratings of "effective" due to improved teach practices Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Utilizing the Extended Learning Time to enhance collaboration around providing students with additional non-traditional intervention such as mentoring, out of school experiences, and similar. high need subgroups will benefit from these types of mentoring as they are encouraged to make connections with staff members. Specific research based strategies that include but are not limited to: Data Driven Grouping and Instruction, Individual Conferencing, Collaboration with Guidance Counselors and Identifying students with specific needs, providing relevant supports Administrators will conduct observations and provide timely feedback according to a pre-arranged schedule. Professional Development time will be devoted to Danielson dimensions, particularly 2D (managing student behavior) 3C 2018-19 CEP-RISE 38  (Engagement) and 3D (Assessment) . Teachers will conduct a series of inter-visitation and provide each other with actionable feedback. Teachers will utilize specific lenses aligned to pre-identified Danielson domains and protocols for inter-visitations. Teacher leaders will, in collaboration with administration, work to provide learning and growth opportunities for all teachers and staff to build capacity within their discipline and as leaders in our community. Teachers and Lead Teachers Increased percentage of teachers receiving an "effective" rating 2018-2019 School Year Teacher Leaders, Coaches Teachers will have inter visitations at least three times during the year. Teachers Increased percentage of teachers receiving an "effective" rating 2018-2019 school year Administration Teacher Leaders Coaches Teacher ratings of "effective" due to improved teach practices Increased collaboration Teacher ratings of "effective" due to improved teach practices Increased collaboration 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through continuous communication so that families are aware of what their children are working on at school, the progress they are making, and supports that are available to assist them further. On the 2018 School survey, 96% of parents reported they felt they are partners with teachers in educating their children. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. · Department and Grade Team Leaders, Administrators · Dean of School Culture, Teacher Coaches. · Teachers, Teacher Leaders · Guidance Counselors Educational Consultants · Funding for Expanded Learning Time 2018-19 CEP-RISE 39  · Additional counseling services, professionals, and programs Funding for enhanced learning opportunities Funding for collaborative learning experiences FUnding for planning and implementation of initiatives Funding for data collection and tools Funding for teacher experiential learning opportunities Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Advance observations and other formative teacher performance data Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School trends in MOTP Ratings for these domains Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 40  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). (aligned with Rise Key 2) Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. (aligned with Rise Key 6) 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. (aligned with Rise Key 1) 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). (aligned with Rise Keys 4 and 5) x X x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? While this tenet is an area of strength, our area for improvement is strengthening our use of resources and partnerships to improve student performance in grades 6-12. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? The mission and vision guides all decision making and initiatives at our school. It is regularly communicated through various method including, but not limited to meetings, formal and informal observations, our professional development plan, calendar, handbook, student planners, and our BECA Broadcast. We have also taken tremendous steps to brand our school in print and within the physical space to present a clear and coherent statement about what we value. To ensure a strong partnership continues with our CBO’s, we intend to continue our frequent communications which include regular meetings, progress monitoring, SLT assessments, benchmark conversations, and strategic planning. The CBO partners will also collaborate with staff through frequent meetings with the guidance department and parent coordinator to ensure that students are receiving the socio-emotional and academic services they need. An evidence based system we use to ensure that goals and benchmarks are being met include Initial Planning Conferences, Mid-Year Conferences, and End of Year Conferences to ensure that individuals are progressing as it relates 2018-19 CEP-RISE 41  to goals. We also meet with teachers strategically for pre and post observations to provide feedback. Our instructional coach also provides support in these areas supplemented by team level meetings. Student and Teacher programs are created based on the needs of students as well as the strengths of teachers. With regards to conducting observations, we created and adhere to an observation cycle with set benchmarks for completion. If teachers need additional formative observations, those observations are conducted as needed. Teachers are provided with feedback within 15 days of the observation and feedback is always specific, generally accompanied with a strategy or intervention to improve teacher practices in the classroom that would best support our students. Feedback to teachers is then reviewed before the next round of observations is conducted to ensure that changes have been made to enhance the classroom experience for students. Shared accountability is supported through both grade and discipline team meetings, which involve teachers and guidance counselors, IB meetings, Skedula, cabinet meeting, and professional development sessions that address academic planning, school data, assessments, etc. The Principal will manage the Assistant Principal in the same manner other staff members are managed and hold them accountable to benchmarks set in advance of the upcoming school year. What are your core belief(s) for school improvement and how they inform your vision for developing instructional leadership at your school? By June 2019, the Principal, Assistant Principal, and Teacher leaders will meet on a bi-weekly basis and continue using the Data Wise inquiry protocols to increase by 5% the number of students in the lowest third earning 10 or more credits from the previous year. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Identifying teacher's strengths, providing teachers with guidance and resources to build on their leadership skills, then provide teachers with trainings/PD's so that teachers are able to take on leadership roles with in the school to further build capacity within our school. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? We work closely with our Parent coordinator, meet regularly with our SIT team, and continuously review our goals to ensure that there is collaboration amongst all stake holders. How will you use evidence-based systems to ensure school and teacher leaders are led by a cycle of continuous learning and use this to inform their teams’ priorities? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Danielson Review the danielson rubric to ensure that teachers are provided with clear actionable steps and resources to improve teacher practices and in turn Teacher mentors, Collaborative Team teachers, Models Teachers, Assistant Principal 2018-19 CEP-RISE 42 Advance Part 3 – Annual Goal impact the teaching and learning in the classrooms. Review feedback in Advance to identify trends and determine teachers' needs for PD, supports, or resources as well as to identify strengths and areas of improvement for teacher practices in the school . Teacher mentors, Collaborative Team teachers, Models Teachers, Assistant Principal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. By June 2019, 15% of teachers will achieve a MOTP rating of "highly effective" in Danielson Domain 4e "Growing and Developing Professionally", as a result of an expanded distributed leadership initiative. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of RISE Benchmarks expected to improve 15% of teachers will achieve a MOTP rating of "highly effective" in Danielson Domain 4e "Growing and Developing Professionally" 15% of teachers will achieve a MOTP rating of "highly effective" in Danielson Domain 3C and 3D Increase State and Regents scores. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 43  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Specific research based strategies that include but are not limited to: Data meeting protocols, systemic scheduling to maximize communication and next steps. Professional development cycles will be held that focus on how to use data in instruction, particularly on generating data and then teaching/reteaching based on the data, technology and collecting data through assessments. Analyze and develop assessments with specific focus on Rigor and Assessment Alignment. The IBDP assessments are frameworks for assessment, and IB rubrics are the assessment standards in all classes. Assessments will be aligned to IBDP and the Common Core. Process to monitor and measure growth goals in alignment with the the Framework for Great Schools and School Specific goals as per RSCEP. All Staff Increased scores on state exams and regents. 2018-2019 School year Administration, Staff, DSR, CSD 15% of teachers will achieve a MOTP rating of "highly effective" in Danielson Domain3C and 3D All Staff 15% of teachers will achieve a MOTP rating of "highly effective" in Danielson Domain3C and 3D 2018-2019 School year Administration, Staff, DSR, CSD All Staff ALL 2018-2019 School year Administration, Staff, DSR, CSD How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increased test scores Increase in MOTP rating of "highly effective" in Danielson Domain3C and 3D 15% of teachers will achieve a MOTP rating of "highly effective" in Danielson Domain3C and 2018-19 CEP-RISE 44  N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3D and Domain 4e N/A 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. BECA maintains online licenses of multiple web based software to support students at home and to allow families to access progress made against NYS standards. SLT will also be updated on a monthly basis alongside of our PA to understand effective leadership. The Principal will also outreach to families directly to communicate with them about leadership initiatives. iready - provides online support in ELA and Math in grades 6-9 allowing parents to access student progress in real time. Students work on both ELA and Math activities for a 45 minutes per week or more. ELA and Math teachers monitor progress and Special Education Coordinator provides general oversight. Kinvolved - supports text-based communication with families and provides parents with a class to class accounting of attendance each day. Parent coordinator and Community School Director provide general oversight. Classroom teachers provide daily attendance data. Skedula - Provides support for daily grades, homework, behavior though an APP as well as via email for each class. Dean of School Culture maintains oversight. School Website - provides support to families via linkage to various organizations, calendar updates, external programming, and other important information. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Department and Grade Team Leaders, Administrators · Peer Collaborative Teachers, Teacher Coaches · Teachers · Guidance Counselors · Funding associated with physical plant improvements, branding, and related items to foster a supportive and welcoming environment · Funding for Expanded Learning Time · Funding International Diploma Program Annual Fee and Student Assessments · International Baccalaureate Training 2018-19 CEP-RISE 45  · Additional counseling services, professionals, and programs Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, there will be a there will be a 5% increase in teachers receiving an MOTP rating of “effective.” Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MOTP ratings in Advance and Danielson Rubric Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 46  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. (aligned with Rise Key 2) 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. (aligned with Rise Key 4 and 6) 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. (aligned with Rise Key 5) 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. (aligned with Rise Key 3) x x X x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Prior to the 2017-2018 school year, we had limited access to additional support in the form of counselors for social and emotional developmental health. With the addition of the Community School Program as well as Morris Heights School Based Health Center, we will be able to provide additional services in the areas of social, emotional developmental and physical health. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for strong family and community ties at your school? What opportunities exist for the school staff to know the students and their families in order to better communicate and partner with families and communities in the vision for the school? Continuous Communication and outreach by teachers and staff, parent workshops, and linkages. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 47 We are currently in the process of transitioning to a new partner CBO. With the addition of the Community School Program as well as Morris Heights School Based Health Center, we will be able to provide additional services in the areas of social, emotional developmental and physical health. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Providing opportunities for parent engagement in school activities and a robust SLT How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? Community School Director will plan activities, which bring the community resources, staff, and families together How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: SLT team meetings Family partnerships with CBO: In transition Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success, in addition to report cards? Skedula, ancedotals, parent contact by teachers, monthly newsletters and progress reports Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Rise Benchmarks. Counselors, Parent Coordinator, and Community School Director will facilitate a series of parent workshops for 8th grade families on the high school articulation process and supporting their children though the transition with study habits aimed at achievement; resulting in 10% of 8th grade students passing the NYS Algebra Regent in June 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which school benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? 2018-19 CEP-RISE 48 List of RISE Benchmarks expected to improve Our parent participation rate will increase to 30% on the Learning Environment Survey as a result of parent support programs being offered in collaboration with our CBO Increased communication with parent/community members. N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 49  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increased parent participation Set up a program of volunteer students and staff to provide Childcare during parent engagement events Families Recruit participants to attend classes (ESL, GED) to families through incentives and flexible scheduling Families Our parent participation rate will increase to 30% on the Learning Environment Survey as a result of parent support programs being offered in collaboration with our CBO Our parent participation rate will increase to 30% on the Learning Environment Survey as a result of parent support programs being offered in collaboration with our CBO CSP, CBO, Administration 2018-2019 School year 2018-2019 School year CSP, CBO, Administration Increased parent participation Families ALL 2018-2019 School year Teachers, Counselors, CSP Provide a workshop in Fall 2015 and Spring 2016 using Pupilpath/Skedula and ManageBac where teachers discuss relevant topics and provide materials with families and provide translations services N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Increased parent participation Improved student attendance and grades due to parent involvement N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 50  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, FSC Supports, etc. Department and Grade Team Leaders, Administrators · Dean of School Culture, Teacher Coaches · Teachers · Guidance Counselors · Funding for Expanded Learning Time · Additional counseling services, professionals, and programs Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019. at least 15% of parents will be regularly attending parent meetings, as measured by attendance monitoring at meetings. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance monitoring at parent meetings and workshops Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 51  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should aligned to the Rise Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Rise ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. As a result of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year, the Performance index on the State ELA Exam will be 50 by the end of the school year. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? X Voluntary Compulsory Rise ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Rise ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Rise ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. A comprehensive data analysis will be conducted to assess the highest need, teacher availability, and individual family circumstances. In collaboration with our CSP and CBO, we will conduct targeted outreach and continuous follow-up to ensure service of at least 50% of students. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Rise School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 52   Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? Our ELT program is compulsory for grades 6-8; students will be assigned to the various programs based on their social, emotional, academic needs. For example, students will be offered a range of enrichment opportunities that are aligned to the school’s instructional focus. Students who are at risk for retention and academic failure will receive intervention that is aligned to their needs. Our strongest focus will be on developing literacy across the content areas, where low math and ELA scores are largely attributed to lack of literacy. Our school day will run from 8:00 - 2:40 p.m., extending the school day by one hour per week for all students. Our afterschool RISE hours will be from 2:40 - 4:20 (W,TH), allowing for small groups, targeted scheduling so that all students receive high-interest academic and enrichment opportunities aligned to CCLS, while preparing them for state exams. Communicating with parents will include online communication, phone, text message, and letters as indicated previously. Communication will be sent in parents’ native language informing them of the benefits of these programs and asking parents to support the initiative by guaranteeing their child(ren)’s attendance and active participation. Additionally, frequent telephone calls and emails will be made to parents/guardian reminding them of these classes. When students are absent, teachers, and staff from both the CBO and BECA will call parents to inform them of their child’s non-participation. Guidance counselors will conduct frequent student conferences to discuss their credit accumulation and academic progress and to identify next steps to meet the graduation requirements. We will include the PA, BECA Staff, CBO and students to assist and ensure this program is a success. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. Summer 2018: Planning and preparation, including programming and professional development, between Principal, CBO, lead teachers, and DSR. The Assistant Principal and Principal will oversee the ELT program, and will include school based staff teachers who will work the extended day in order to provide services to our students. Additionally, our partnerships with Center for Supportive Schools and City Year will augment our ELT by providing enrichment activities and implementing programs. We will evaluate the program periodically using attendance data and assessment data, with our first assessment taking place by the end of the Fall 2018 semester. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Summer 2018: Planning and preparation, including programming and professional development, between Principal, CBO, lead teachers, and DSR. Fall 2018: continue professional development for ELT, assign teachers and courses/activities. Notify students and parents. Collect data; attendance, assessments, etc. Early Spring 2019: assess success of program to date, make adjustments as needed. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 CEP-RISE 53  Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Community School Partner Community School Director Expanded Learning Time Coordinator Department and Grade Team Leaders, Administrators · Dean of School Culture, Teacher Coaches · Teachers · Guidance Counselors · Funding for Expanded Learning Time · International Baccalaureate Training · Additional counseling services, professionals, and programs Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, 10% of students in grades 6-8 will have shown growth in either Math and/or ELA as evidenced by iReady data. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IReady ELA and Math Data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 54  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) How is the Community School strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Center for Supportive Schools will provide general programming, which will engage students in physical fitness, creative arts, language and technology. At-risk and targeted students will be assigned to various ELT programs based on their social, emotional and academic needs. One hour of ELT is embedded in the regular academic day ensuring that all students benefit from the integration of these programs. Students who are at risk for retention and academic failure will receive intervention that is aligned to their needs. Our focus will be on developing Literacy across the content areas in Middle School, where low Math and ELA scores are attributed to lack of Literacy comprehension. CBO Partners will provide targeted programming for students during and after school with the support of subcontracted organizations. Regular check-ins and service quality meetings with CBOs will be in effect to ensure student progress in ELT programs. Community School Director will hold regular monthly check ins with each CBO provider to ensure alignment with school goals and outcome expectations. For Parent Engagement, bi-monthly newsletters will be sent home to inform parents of upcoming school events and spotlight academic curriculum and extra-curricular activities for both Middle School and High School. Additionally, frequent phone calls and emails will be made to parents/guardian for attendance, positive student progress updates, upcoming community events, and school events. When students are absent, teachers, and staff from both the CBO and BECA will call parents to inform them of their child’s non-participation. Guidance counselors will conduct frequent student conferences to discuss their credit accumulation and academic progress and to identify next steps to meet the graduation requirements. We will include the PTA, BECA Staff, CBO and students to assist and ensure consistent parent communication and outreach. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Beginning in September 2018, the Community School Program will provide supports in core content areas such as ELA and math for the Bronx Early College Academy for Teaching & Learning (BECA) to middle school students who are not meeting or approaching performance targets. To ensure that the needs of students in grades 6-8 are met, collaboration in every phase of instruction and assessment will be emphasized. This collaboration will support the alignment of curriculum and instruction to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS ) in the content areas. Through collaboration with the administration, teacher teams, parent coordinator, other school-level staff, social emotional service providers, CBO linkages, and CBO subcontractors, students will have ample opportunities to experience new learning strategies, engage in enrichment activities, and experience social emotional development. By the end of the school year, the school will demonstrate progress in meeting the benchmarks moving a greater percentage of students into levels 3 and 4 on standardized tests in ELA and math. BECA seeks to create a safe and supportive environment for all students through a school culture that meets students' mental and social emotional needs. With the addition of new social work and guidance staff, as well as through the support of the CSD and the Community Schools Associate, students' mental health service needs will be met. This will help BECA achieve its' goal to increase student attendance overall to meet the RISE benchmark in the 2018-2019 school year. BECA seeks to continue building a positive school culture by offering more after-school/enrichment learning opportunities, expanding ELT program offerings in the areas of STEM and the arts, and increasing student leadership 2018-19 CEP-RISE 55  opportunities across grades 6-12. BECA also seeks to increase its emphasis on College and Career readiness through a school-based internship program, leadership/mentorship and direct service opportunities, encouraging students to become active participants in the CST meetings, and Peer Group Connection for BECA middle school students. With increased interested in enrichment programs and leadership opportunities, students' attendance will improve by overall 1.5% throughout the year. BECA creates a network of support and connectivity for parents to engage and be empowered in their childrens' education and social emotional development. Parent engagement in the BECA community will increase by 50% by the end of the 2018-2019 school year. This will be achieved by increasing parent events and professional learning opportunities for parents. Please answer the following question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? Through collaboration with the administration, teacher teams, parent coordinator, other school-level staff, social emotional service providers, CBO linkages, and CBO subcontractors, students will have ample opportunities to experience new learning strategies, engage in enrichment activities, and experience social emotional development. By the end of the school year, the school will demonstrate progress in meeting the benchmarks moving a greater percentage of students into levels 3 and 4 on standardized tests in ELA and math. For Parent Engagement, bi-monthly newsletters will be sent home to inform parents of upcoming school events and spotlight academic curriculum and extra-curricular activities for both Middle School and High School. Additionally, frequent phone calls and emails will be made to parents/guardian for attendance, positive student progress updates, upcoming community events, and school events. When students are absent, teachers, and staff from both the CBO and BECA will call parents to inform them of their child’s non-participation. Guidance counselors will conduct frequent student conferences to discuss their credit accumulation and academic progress and to identify next steps to meet the graduation requirements. We will include the PTA, BECA Staff, CBO and students to assist and ensure consistent parent communication and outreach. Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Center for Supportive Schools 6th through 12th grades LEAP 6th through 8th grades Overseeing the Community School Strategy, academic and social emotional support for students through mentoring and tutoring Social Emotional Development through performing arts (dance) Salvadori Center City Year 6th through 8th grades STEM experimental learning 6th through 8th grades, at risk of ELA and Math performance ELA and Math academic tutoring 2018-19 CEP-RISE 56 Ramapo for Children 6th through 12th grades Building Beats 6th through 8th grades Social emotional development through experiential learning at daytime retreats Social emotional development through performing arts (music) Part 2b. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) will be the school’s lead CBO partner. In partnership with the school, CSS has hired a Community School Director. The Director will be responsible for the day-to-day management of the community school strategy, facilitating and providing leadership for the collaborative process of developing a continuum of services for children, families, and community members. The Director will drive development of community school action plans and planning for sustainability. S/he will track the school’s progress against performance goals, collect school data, and support program evaluation activities and manage partnerships. The Director will ensure that the community school strategy is implemented at exceptional levels of quality with full support, buy-in, and regular communication with stakeholders across the school community. Specific position responsibilities will include: • Build and maintain relationships with administration, faculty, staff, students, parents, and community partners • Organize and expand upon the membership of the Community School Team (CST) to include diverse school community stakeholders and CBOs • Conduct a needs assessment process, including: reviewing school and student-level data; conducting focus groups with parents, students, faculty, staff, administrators, and community partners; and reviewing and/or conducting school climate and culture survey • Conduct a community asset assessment to identify viable partnerships that can meet the needs of students and families of the school community, including developing metrics for partnership evaluation 2018-19 CEP-RISE 57  • Recruit and develop partnership agreements with people and community organizations willing to offer programs and services for students and families at the school in accordance with identified needs • Identify evidence and research-based practices and/or partnerships that address priority areas for the community school strategy, which may include but are not limited to: Parent/Family Engagement; Community Engagement; Youth Development; Academic Rigor and Instructional Practices; Health and Mental Health; Tutoring; After school programming; and Mentoring. Develop, maintain, and publicize a schedule of programs and activities offered at the school • Implement and maintain a process that encourages referrals to programs and services offered at the school • Identify needs of chronically absent students, apply interventions, and track and monitor impact of interventions on weekly basis, as part of weekly Student Success Summit • Collect and monitor program implementation data and student data for each partnership that allow easy data analysis and interaction by the SLT and other school stakeholders CSS, in partnership with the school, will assess all students’ personalized needs to ensure appropriate programming opportunities are provided within the school day and during Expanded Learning Time (ELT). In-school support for students will be provided through the integration of one or more of CSS’s core solutions that provide an integrated focus on academic, social, and emotional learning, such that every student and family has strong relationships with the school community and an individualized pathway to success. Specific student supports implemented may include: • an evidence-based intervention that supports school transitions by leveraging older students as leaders and mentors for new and incoming students (Peer Group Connection) and BECA's Career Readiness Program. Working with the principal, SLT, and CST, CSS will identify specialist partnerships to provide comprehensive expanded learning and enrichment opportunities, and mental health services to meet the needs of all students. The school’s current partnerships with CBOs such as Counseling in Schools will be expanded to supplement ELT. In addition, CSS and the school will identify and implement additional partnerships to provide ELT academic support in Math and ELA. All parents will be engaged in parent-teacher conferences at designated times during the school year but will also have opportunities to visit classrooms and engage in first-hand experience of their child’s academic learning throughout the year. Parents will also be invited to participate in monthly Community School Team meetings, focus groups, and other forums where they can contribute their voices to the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools. Workshops provided for parents, by the Parent Coordinator, CSS, and other community partners, will focus on helping them learn how to advocate for their children. The Director will conduct a weekly standing meeting with the Principal, Assistant Principal, key staff, and representatives from other CBO partners, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. The Director will provide a data summary for the team to review at each meeting. Each team member will also come prepared to discuss key questions and updates in areas of community school work where they are taking initiative. Part 3 – Community School Partnerships Oversight 2018-19 CEP-RISE 58  Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Center for Supportive Schools Center for Educational Partnerships will work closely with the DOE and all other key stakeholders in the joint collection, compilation and analysis of RCSP related data. This activity shall be jointly managed by the Community School Director and the Center's Data Analysis Program Associate. The collection of program related data will begin with the CSP Implementation and Planning Phase. During that period, the CSP will carefully document the creation of the Community School Team (CST). The anecdotal information compiled during this Phase could be used (upon request from the DOE) to create a "Primer" which could benefit future CSP lead organizations. Minutes from each CST meeting shall be placed in a Binder for subsequent review. At the end of each contract period, these minutes will be analyzed to determine the impact this group has had on the program's day-to-day operations. Based upon these analyses, Center for Supportive Schools will consider strategies for improving the CST's efficacy. As mentioned, parents and guardians play an important role in the success of the partnership in the CSP. To that end, adult utilization of program services and level of involvement in the host school will be closely tracked by CSP staff. Registration forms, attendance sheets and feedback will be maintained for each activity, e.g., parent workshops/conferences, adult education programs, trips and other volunteer activity, etc., for which parents and guardians choose to enroll. Center for Supportive Schools University will look very closely at the periodic customer satisfaction surveys administered by the program. The input yielded by these documents will be used to drive the CSP's quality assurance and continuous program improvement activities. Anecdotal feedback provided by BECA’s Parent Association and Parent Coordinator will also figure prominently in the project evaluation process. Student participation in all expanded learning and enrichment activities will be reviewed on a bi-weekly basis to track utilization of these services. The CSP's Expanded Learning Coordinator and Education Specialist will take an active role in this portion of the project review process. These staff will meet with the teachers on a weekly basis to determine if student performance has improved for youth who participate in ELT activities. The progress reports, report card grades and standardized assessment scores of these students will also be reviewed regularly by project staff. With respect to the CSP’s mental health services, aggregate metrics for program utilization, e.g., number of new intakes, individual and group counseling sessions, client referrals, etc., will be compiled for evaluation purposes. Releasing and analyzing this data in aggregate form will protect client privacy around the mental health services they have received. The effectiveness of this component will also be measured by the number of OORS incidents reported by the school over the course of each academic year. The supportive resources that Center for Supportive Schools brings into the school will be carefully analyzed. For example, quantitative data will be maintained on: 1) total hours of asset building activities conducted by the CSP; 2) workshops and other trainings offered; 3) asset building hours performed by the CSP; 4) new partners brought into the CSP consortium; and, 5) material donations and volunteer hours secured by the program. The total dollar amount of matching grants and contracts secured to support the CSP will also be documented. It is important to note that Center for Supportive Schools plans to utilize data collection strategies that have proven successful on CSPs across the nation. These approaches are: 1) the Community School Evaluation Toolkit created by the Coalition for Community Schools and, 2) the "Effective Data Collection and Sharing" guidelines articulated in "Scaling the Community Schools Strategy in New York City." Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The Community School Director (CSD) will manage the program's day-to-day operation. This full-time employee will be permanently stationed at BECA and will have an office in the building. One of the main roles of the CSD will be to serve as a liaison between all key stakeholders in the school community (e.g., students, parents, teachers, principal 2018-19 CEP-RISE 59  and external partners), Center for Supportive Schools and the Department of Education. In their managerial capacity, this employee will assemble and preside over the Community Schools Team (CST) sub-committee of the BECA School Leadership Team (SLT). Center for Supportive Schools expects that the CSD will also be a sitting member of the building's SLT as well and attend all meetings held by that group. Dual membership in those two bodies is essential since it will provide the CSD with a complete, up-to-the-moment understanding of BECA’s needs and current status. The CSD will be expected to have regular (as in daily) dialogue with all constituents in the building. To ensure that the needs of all families are met, the CSD will work closely with BECA’s Parent Coordinator and Parent Association. Center for Supportive Schools firmly believes that the process of asset building (i.e., a methodology for sustainable development of communities based on their strengths and potential) plays a crucial role in reforming multi-problem schools. In a similar fashion, the CSD will be responsible for identifying and leveraging resources (both inside and outside of the target neighborhood) which meet the needs of the entire school community. Center for Supportive Schools (CSS) in partnership with school leadership will implement the Community School program and provide oversight. Key personnel include: · Principal, will provide general supervision, oversight and will participate in all SLT and CST meetings. · Community School Director (CSD) will drive the day-to-day implementation of the Community School program, as described above. · Assistant Principal, as well as the Social Work and Guidance teams will provide general oversight and will participate in all SLT and CST meetings. In addition, she will support the implementation of Peer Group Connection (PGC) and work with CSS to ensure that PGC students are meeting the needs of targeted students. · Our Parent Coordinator will be a leader in outreaching and engaging parents in monthly forums, engaging them in workshops and leadership opportunities in the school community, and matching families to community services to meet their needs. · Representatives from partners will provide monthly reports on progress and challenges to the CST in accordance with their service agreements where applicable. The joint ELT program will be structured as follows: · Teachers will have the opportunity to propose and implement ELT opportunities for students throughout the school year in response to student needs. Teachers will work with CSS and school leadership to access appropriate resources and curricula to support their ELT work. · Partners will be engaged to provide ELT beyond that which is provided by teachers and to supplement teacher-led ELT in targeted areas. · Teaching artists through organizations including but not limited to Counseling in Schools, will be engaged to provide engaging creative arts content through projects-based learning opportunities during ELT. CSS will require all partners to submit monthly impact reports assessing program quality based upon measures defined in the partnership agreements. These reports will serve as an ongoing common framework for communication between the CSS and the school and partners. CSS will use a variety of mechanisms to track progress. Data will be presented on each outcome in Community School Team and School Leadership Team meeting within a "data snapshot" where the comprehensive data can be viewed in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 60  one dashboard view. This data will be used to assess progress towards meeting the above defined outcomes and to address challenges if outcomes are not being met. Specific ways to track progress for key outcomes include: · Successful implementation and operation of the Community School Team will be tracked based on: representative composition from all community stakeholders; number of members committed to the team compared to average meeting attendance; evaluations completed after CST meetings that assess the extent to which each member finds the meetings to be well-managed, collaborative, and productive. · Increased parent engagement will be tracked based on: participation in Parent Association meetings; participation in ongoing needs assessment and feedback activities; participation in parent services provided; the number of parents who assume specific roles in the Community Schools effort; participation in parent-teacher conferences; teachers who report developing positive relationships with parents through weekly phone calls and other means of communication; parents who report developing positive relationships with teachers through weekly phone calls and other means of communication. · Increased student participation in expanded learning and enrichment activities will be tracked based on: attendance in activities; inventory and evaluation of services and activities provided; the number of students who assume leadership roles in expanded learning and enrichment activities. · Increased utilization rates for mental health services and improved mental health will be tracked based on: the number and demographics of students and families that participate in services compared to the entire target population; frequency of support utilized compared with recommended frequency of support provided; evaluations from students and families reporting on perceived impact of services; student academic performance data improvements and other on-track indicator improvements. · Increased school resources will be tracked based on: the estimated value of in-kind services rendered; targeted students served before and after implementation of community school strategy and estimated cost per student; and value of additional resources generated for the school to provide community school services and support by CSS and/or other CBO partners. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Community School Programs will begin in September 2015 and run through June 2017. The following is an initial timeline which we will continue to develop throughout the summer. DESCRIPTION DATE(S) OF TASK OR ACTIVITY 05/15/18 Staff from the Center for Supportive Schools and the Community Schools Program (CSP) review the approved contract, in addition to the planning and assessment timeline. Specific tasks are assigned to CSP staff. 05/18/18 - 05/19/19 CSP staff meet with the Principal, School Leadership Team (SLT) and other key stakeholders to discuss School Renewal Plan. INITIAL MEETING WITH THE SCHOOL RISE TEAM. 05/19/18 -05/27/19 Recruitment of the Community Schools Team (CST). The CST’s membership is finalized. Orientation and training for CST members commences. STAFF RESPONSIBLE END RESULT ● Principal, Assistant Principal, Key Staff All activities leading to program implementation commence. ● Community School Director ● Principal, Assistant Principal, Key Staff Second intensive CSP planning phase begins. ● Community School Director ● Principal DOE-mandated stakeholder team is identified and assembled. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 61  05/19/18 -08/31/19 Needs assessment and asset building activities commence. CSP staff hold a pair of strategic planning events with Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Parent Association, Community Planning Board members and other neighborhood constituents. 05/20/18 -05/29/19 Engagement of the program’s sub-contractors and linked organizations begin. These partners are oriented to the CSP. The process of completely integrating these groups into the host school begins. ● Community School Director ● Principal, Assistant Principal, Key Staff ● Community School Director ● Principal, Assistant Principal, Key Staff ● Community School Director ● Parent Coordinator school. A survey of school and neighborhood assets is conducted. The assets are then catalogued for future use. The program ensures that all planned services are seamlessly embedded into the host 06/01/18 - 06/10/19 Media outreach and public engagement activities begin. A formal press release announcing the program is sent out. ● Community School The program’s promotional activities begin. 06/01/18 – 06/10/19 Review budget and finalize Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Director ● Principal, AP, Key Staff, CS Director, DSR Program staff and budget will be in place. Separate from this R-CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 62  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Regents, NYSESLAT, Scholarship Report, Middle School Exams, Formative class assessment data, Parent Feedback Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) IReady, NYS Ready, Regents preparation, Formative Assessment Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Regents, Scholarship Report, Middle School Exams, Formative class assessment data, Parent Feedback Regents, Scholarship Report, Middle School Exams, Formative class assessment data, Parent Feedback Regents, Scholarship Report, Formative class assessment data, Parent Feedback Teacher Recommendation, Scholarship Report, Attendance Data, Crisis Intervention, Parent Request etc. IReady, Regents preparation, Formative Assessment Regents and State preparation, Formative Assessment Regents preparation, Formative Assessment Pull-out, classroom workshops, individualized counseling, crisis counseling, family counseling, referrals, LGBT support Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction Small Group Instruction, One to one, Tutoring and computer aided instruction When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day and afterschool, Some Saturdays, during lunch During the school day and afterschool, Some Saturdays, during lunch During the school day and afterschool, Some Saturdays, during lunch During the school day and afterschool, Some Saturdays, during lunch During the school day and afterschool, Some Saturdays, during lunch 2018-19 CEP-RISE 63  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 69 students are currently in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will use the allotment to purchase uniforms and school supplies at the beginning of the year. We will collaborate with our CBO to provide additional services. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 64  Clothing, linkages, and individualized services as needed. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 CEP-RISE 65  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Title 1 funds will be used to support teacher development by attendance to offsite PD as well as the hiring of professional consultants to provide coaching, PD, and related activities towards the development of teachers. Additionally, efforts will be made to ensure that additional teachers become highly qualified by subsidizing graduate study and all certification costs related to licensure for those teachers who elect to pursue licensure in areas of need. We actively recruit teachers based on needs, program changes, and the attrition of staff. In partnership with multiple teacher pipeline organizations and the DOE, we select candidates based on qualifications and staff who are the best fit for our population and who believe in our mission. Once teachers are hired, they receive ongoing mentoring and coaching support. Professional development is based on teacher needs and school goals. Ongoing professional development both off-site and in house and is aligned to the mission our school. Assignments of teachers are based on student need and teacher license area. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). IB Teacher and Administrator Professional Development · Offsite Teacher Workshops on Common Core Unit and Lesson Development · Support Staff and Paraprofessional Professional Development · NYC Teaching Collaborative Teacher Leadership and Coaching Professional Development American Museum of Natural History Coaching Professional Development Annual Staff Retreat Instructional Coaching 2018-19 CEP-RISE 66  Educational Consultants Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers receive professional development around the use of curriculum, instruction, and assessment · Our school has a comprehensive assessment plan · Teachers receive feedback on classroom level assessments · Teachers and administrators analyze state assessments to understand strengths and instructional gaps that students may have to help target instruction Teachers also review student assessments and student work products during team meetings to improve instruction 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (R-CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, 2018-19 CEP-RISE 67  State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 541,741.00 104,444 0 11,200.00 0 3,147,122.00 X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 4B, 5B, 5D 5C, 4B, 6 4B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 68  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/R-CEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 69  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current R-CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X324, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronx Early College Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology through parent programs such as GED, workshops, ELL support; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children, for example, financial aid and college workshops, parent nights, International Baccalaureate Candidates parent meetings ; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress through, in part, teacher outreach and contact, progress reports, ; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 70  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 71  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 72  09X324, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 73  ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2018-19 CEP-RISE 74  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 CEP-RISE 75  ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 76  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 CEP-RISE 77  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Program #1 is to provide Saturday Academy to support in collaboration with the ELA teachers, for targeted ELLs as a supplement to reinforce instruction delivered during the regular school day, on Saturday's during the Months of February and March from 9am-12pm for a total of 7 Saturday Sessions-2/ 4, 2/11, 2/18, 3/4, 3/11, 3/18, 3/25. In addition to ELL's services daily to be provided by our ELL's teacher. Program #2: Thursdays 7:15-8:00Am for HS students which will work as a supplement to reinforce instruction delivered during the regular school day. Rationale: In the Saturday school program, we will be focusing on Reading and Writing. Judging from their performance on the NYSESLAT, in which most of our students are transitioning or expanding. We have 27 transitioning and 36 expanding students in grades 6-12, only 3 are transitioning high school students and 9 are expanding high school students. We have 3 students who are emerging or entering in the middle school only. The data shows that a significant number our ESL students did poorly on the NYS ELA test. In addition internal diagnostics administered in ELA and ESL classes also revealed that our ELL's have difficulty with the comprehension of on grade level texts. In addition a review of Regents Pass Rate data have shown that our ELL's struggle to pass the Regents’ Exams at the same rate as their peers. Review of item analysis of the Regents Exams showed that their biggest area of need is in the area of information and understanding. In essence, if our students are not able to understand what they are reading, it is hard for them to perform well and this is reflected not just on the ELA tests, but in their other academic courses as well. Furthermore, we have also noticed that just as their reading comprehension skills are not developing as quickly as is needed, their writing skills are also lagging behind grade level. Therefore, the goal is to have a special class that will focus primarily in on strengthening their skills in these two areas. Subgroups and grade levels of student to be served: Primarily this program targets 6-12th grade students, due to the urgency of regents preparation and the large population of ELL's at the middle school level. The plan is to work intensely with a small group to strengthen their skills in their areas of weakness. Classes have been grouped to address ELL's students and provide them with their needed support by our ELL's provider during the school day. In grades 6-8, that means that our ELL's teachers will provide support during their ELA class through a push-in model. The high school will also have zero period on Thursdays, 7:15-8:00 to receive their ELL service support, in addition they are taught by our HS ENL teachers daily. Language of instruction: The Language of instruction will be English. The program will employ current ESL strategies and scaffolding to make text comprehensible for all students. # and types of certified teachers: The program will be facilitated and instruction delivered by two certified ESL teachers, one certified Bilingual teacher, as well as ELA instructors. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 78  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information In order to provide home language support, materials are made available in the students' home language as well as English. We also provide bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, as well as a plethora of graphic organizers to support students' growth. Types of materials: To strengthen the students’ skills in their areas of focus, the program will use International Baccalaureate Language B: English curriculum to review reading and writing strategies. We will also review past NYS ELA and Regents tests both to build reading stamina and to prepare them for the kinds of questions that they need to work on in order to excel. These materials will also incorporate resources to help improve their essay-writing skills. Materials use by both ELA and ESL teachers are made in house based on students' needs. Such materials include graphic organizers, simplified texts, scaffolds, visual supports, and differentiated instruction. Students will be engaged in various activities during the program. This includes research skills, learning to utilize glossaries and dictionaries to build their word knowledge, small group instruction, independent reading activities, various speaking and listening activities, field trips to support culturally relevant instruction. Our records are maintained by our teacher leaders utilizing google documents and folders. We also maintain paper copies in our students' cumulative records, including attendance and any parent notification. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: At BECA, we are committed to providing quality training for all staff members that will have a direct impact on student performance. Most of our students are current ELLs, former ELLs, or students for whom English is a second language, so essentially all members of staff are responsible for the delivery of instruction and support to ELLs. Teachers to receive training: Since all our staff members instruct and provide essential services to our ELLs, we provide multiple opportunities for the professional development for all our staff. Some of the staff workshops will be incorporated in our Monday PD sessions at no cost. Title III program plans for our staff include institutional as well peer support. We send our teachers to various PD's provided by the NYC DOE, Bronx Borough Field Support Center, and DELLSS at cost depending on the PD. Our teachers also attend weekly PD's Monday's after school, 2:40-3:40, every Monday. In addition we have weekly grade team meetings and discipline meetings which teachers participate in, as well as Common Planning time during which the ELL's providers can also support planning lessons for our ELL's students. Weekly grade meetings: At these meetings, the ESL Department collaborates with teachers and assists them with modifying their lessons to take into account ELLs in their classes. We also have discussions about specific students who might be struggling and collaborate on ways to help them. In some cases, we collaboratively design alternative tasks that accommodate students’ needs. The teacher leaders, grade team and discipline team leaders, all maintain copies of attendance, agendas and meeting notes are maintained, which we keep track on on google docs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 79  Part C: Professional Development The Monday PD's are provided by our Model and collaborative team teachers, Assistant Principal, and outside providers such as IReady and CiteLighter, all of whom are qualified to provided data driven professional development to support instruction. In addition our ELL's teachers provide content area teachers with resources and supports for PD, so that strategies to support ELL's can be utilized in all classrooms. Beyond these meetings, we also have several workshops planned to targets area of teacher need. 1. We plan to have an initial workshop where the focus will be: Who are ELLs and what does that mean in terms of instruction? At this workshop we will address identification and programming information. We will also discuss the BICS and the CALP and why it is that some of their students seem to be fluent in English but do badly on tests. At this workshop we will also be discussing state mandates and how students can test out of the program. Rationale for workshop: We have decided to deliver this workshop because many of our teachers are brand new to the DOE and are struggling with these questions. 2. Our second workshop will focus on: ESL strategies in the classroom to enhance student engagement and academic performance. At this workshop we will collaboratively draw up a lesson plan for different disciplines. We will discuss ESL strategies and present a demo lesson on what this looks like in practice. Strategies include using visuals, sound, technology, teaching vocabulary, building background knowledge, and other ESL methods of scaffolding. Rationale for workshop: As a school with many brand new teachers, most of whom are also new to the DOE, a number of our teachers are struggling to design successful lessons that meet the needs of our ELL population. The goal of this workshop is to provide them with practical tips and strategies to succeed. 3: The third workshop will focus on: Preparing for NYS tests and quick tips to show ESL students how to answer questions/ how to locate key information as they read. We will be reviewing the NYSESLAT exam as well as examining the language of the state tests to see what terms throw off students when they attempt to answer questions. Rationale for workshop: A number of our ELLs are facing the Regents this year and they are ill-prepared to handle the comprehensive exams. Some of them have had several unsuccessful attempts and are beginning to feel frustrated. Targeted teaching and useful ESL strategies will help teachers prepare them better. Name of Provider: These three workshops will be delivered by the ESL department. The ESL department itself plans to attend UFT, Bronx DELLSS and DOE workshops on best practices for ELLs, teaching ELLs to write essays and incorporating the Common core into the curriculum. THE ESL dept will turn-key information to staff at PDs and staff meetings. At BECA, in the spirit of the UDL, we are always reviewing our practices and providing information in the form of articles and/or reports that make available examples, different kinds of instructional activities and guidelines for helping ELLs succeed. Additionally, all language and ELA teachers will be attending an IB Programs which will enhance their knowledge of language acquisition and literacy strategies Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 CEP-RISE 80  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities  how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: Parents have multiple opportunities for involvement at BECA. They have opportunities to be involved through volunteer work, for example: Learning Leaders help with office work, bulletin boards, making phone calls for our upcoming events as well as open house (parents of ELLs help make those phone calls that are in Spanish), lunch duty and hallway monitoring. Parents of ELLs have the opportunity to be trained as a Learning Leader volunteer by participating in a 6 hour training. These trainings, as well as all of the workshops offered at the school, are translated in Spanish. Parents also have the opportunity to assist with family events sponsored by our Parent Association. Parents of ELLs help us in translation (for ex: Computers For Youth Kick Off Day). All parents are kept informed weekly of the happenings at BECA through a weekly newsletter sent out by the principal and parent coordinator. Parent Teacher Conference, Curriculum Night, Open House, workshops at BECA, are used as a way to introduce all parents, including parents of ELLs to the typical schedule their children follow on a day to day basis. Parents are provided with translational and interpretation services verbally and in written correspondence. Parent workshops will include Emergency Preparedness, hosted by Ready NY on 9/21, Personal Finance and College Savings hosted by PriMerica on 10/26, Tax Filing 101 on 11/30, Prescription Drugs hosted by the Community Affairs division of the 46th precinct on 12/14, and Gang Awareness also hosted by the Community Affairs division in February of 2017. All workshops provided will be facilitated by Spanish bilingual facilitators to accommodate our Spanish speaking population. Written materials will also be provided in Spanish. In addition, for any parents with another home language we will provide written materials and translation in their home language, as needed. Opportunities for ELL parents to talk with each other, as well as with the ESL teacher, continue their understanding of our program at BECA, and ask any questions they may have are continuously available. An additional resource for parents is access to Pupil Path through the Skedula program. This program is an online grade book for teachers, as well as allow parents to keep track of their child's grades and behavior. Parents are informed of any activities through school messenger and memos that are either mailed or backpack. Our ESL Teacher works closely with all school staff including the parent coordinator to ensure that our ELL students are represented in all school activities. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 81 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 CEP-RISE 82  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Bronx Early College Academy Borough Bronx School Number 324 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Yvette E. Rivera Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Avrien Anderson Teacher/Subject Area Diana Liu (ELA/ESL extension) Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Mariya Pushkantser Coach type here School Counselor Parent type here Parent Coordinator Myrna Felix Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Nicole Quezada, Special Ed C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 CEP-RISE 83  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 520 Total number of ELLs 67 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 12.88% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 3 4 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Students are routinely assessed on Common Core proficiency through various forms that mirror Common Core State Exam questions and testing conditions. Student data will include teacher created assessments, IReady skill based diagnostics, and Ready assessment which mirror's the CCLS exam. The data indicates that the majority of ELLs are not proficient in Common Core standards and lagging behind their peers. Teachers are to use this data to explicitly teach the standards to the ELLs while assessing them on a weekly basis. QRI-5 (Quality Reading Inventory) • Students are administered the QRI-5 in order to see where they are strong or need additional support in reading fluency and comprehension. We also use the score to predict how they will perform on the NYSESLAT at the end of the year. • administer an ELL QRI-5 in October, January, and again in March to see where our students are in English. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 84  • Teachers will also be provided with rigorous professional training in an effort to help ELL students develop in all the modalities (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) Teachers will have access to IReady data and be provided with student data on their ELA state test scores and READY assessment scores with an item analysis breakdown to better support students' needs. Teachers will be notified of the results of the students’ literacy skills assessment so that they can use it to appropriately plan their instruction and select appropriate ENL strategies. ENL teacher will have that list and both ENL and Bilingual Ed teachers will reassess their literacy skills using the QRI-5/DIBELS and determine if there is an improvement and what new techniques should be employed. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have an assessment calendar to ensure students are assessed regularly. In addition, the ELL's coordinator will be supporting teachers in providing support for students and accurately assessing students who are ELL's. Students will take an IReady diagnostic in September as well, which teachers will review during teacher team meetings to group students based on their skill sets. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? AMAO targets include NYSESLAT proficiency. Our goal is to have ELLs reach at least one proficiency above their previous performance by the end of the year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students will receive after school tutoring for ELA. Teachers will use data to do small group targeted instruction in class. Students will also receive their ENL service based on the data from our ENL provider through push-in and pull out instruction depending on their specific needs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not Applicable/ Bronx Early College Academy is a 6-12 school so we do not teach grades k-5. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After Reviewing and Analyzing the Data across proficiency levels on the LAB-R and NYSESLAT, there are 34students “Expanding” which means that a majority of students have a firm grasp on English. Additionally, all middle school students scored a 1 or 2 in the ELA exam and a majority are failing the Math exam. We have 27 Transitioning, 4 emerging, and 2 Entering students based on ATS data. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We share data with teachers once teachers are assigned students and classes in September. The ENL provider will meet with teachers to share specific findings as well as potential supports for the students in those classes. In addition, this data is used to program students accordingly to ensure they receive the necessary time requirements for ENL services. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). 2018-19 CEP-RISE 85  a. Freestanding ENL program. BECA, as a grades 6-12 school, groups students in different ways depending on the grade level. All 6th grade and 8th grade ELL students are placed in one classroom, usually the ICT class, where they will received daily push-in services by the ENL teacher through their Humanities subject course as well as 1 period of pull-out services also by the ENL teacher. Additionally, our 6th grade ELA teacher has her ESL extension will be providing additional support in their ELA class. These students also indirectly benefit from having two team teachers for their Math and ELA courses who will support them in providing General Ed teaching strategies to access and grasp content. The 7th grade ELLs are a larger group, so they are divided into two classes. The higher achieving subgroup is placed in a general ed classroom where the ENL teacher provides them standalone ENL services in Humanities as well as pull-out services once a day. The second subgroup is put in the ICT/Bilingual Ed classroom where two team teachers, one of them Bilingual Ed, provides them with support and ENL services in Math and ELA. These students also receive pull out services by the ENL teacher. In total, 6-8th grade receives about 2.5-3 periods a day of ENL support. The high school ELLs (9th-12th grade) have individual schedules depending on their academic plans. Therefore, these students receive 1 full period of ENL pull out services by the ENL teacher. The small group of beginner and intermediate HS ELLs also receive push-in services by the ENL teacher when needed. The integrated model for the MS includes one General Ed teacher and the ENL teacher instructing the Humanities content area and one ELA certified teacher with an ESL extension to provide ESL services for the ELL's. The integrated model for the HS includes one dually certified teacher for the Spanish content area. This teacher holds an ESL licence and provides ESL services for the ELLs. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Placing ENL Students • Students are placed in the ENL program based on scores obtained on the LAB-R (initial assessment) and the NYSESLAT (annual assessment) as per CR Part 154 mandate. BECA ensures that all students receive mandated ENL minutes. • According to Part CR154, all ENL students, IEP and non-IEP are to receive the following at the high school level: a) Entering students receive 540 minutes per week. b) Emerging students receive 360 minutes per week. c) Expanding students receive 180 minutes per week. d) Commanding students receive 90 minutes per week. Our school takes into consideration the programming guidelines and the cluster of classes that are grouped with the mandated minutes for the ENL classes. • The programmer arranges the schedule with the assistance of the ENL teacher in a way that students receive the mandated hours in consultation with the school. • Classes are 45 minutes and ENL services are scheduled following the block of classes taking into account the mandated minutes for the levels of Entering, emerging, expanding, and proficient students. a) Entering students are programmed for a minimum of 2.5 units of ENL per day b)Emerging students are programmed for a minimum of 2 units per day. c) Expanding students are programmed for a minimum of 1 unit of ENL per day. The ENL teacher provides ESL services to 6th - 8 th grade ELLs via 1 period of Humanities per day. For transitioning and expanding students in 6th grade the ELA/ESL teacher will provide service through inter grated ENL (180 min-4 days/week) and 90 min (2 days/week) for commanding students. The ENL will push in for all ELLs via 1 period of content-area. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 86  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the middle school, 6th grade students will receive integrated services from their ELA/ESL teacher, all ELL students will receive the support of the ENL teacher as she pushes in for their Humanities content classes (1 unit per day) and Intermediate and Beginner students receive additional support through pull-outs by the ENL teacher to work on targeted ENL instruction (1 unit per day). Beginner ELLs in the 7th grade get additional support in their Math and ELA classes through the ICT/Bilingual Ed Teacher that follows them for both content classes (3 units per day). High school students are also pulled out by the ENL teacher 1-2 periods a day depending if they are Intermediate or Advanced ELLs. We have no Beginner ELLs in the high school this year. This model represents our freestanding ENL program where students receive ENL/ENL services as an ENL or Bilingual Ed teacher pushes into their core content classes for 1-3 periods in Humanities, Math, and ELA and receive additional support through targeted instruction during pull-out sessions by the ENL teacher (1 unit per day). Most of our ELLs speak Spanish and native language support is given through translation, multi-lingual books, Google translatation services, and bilingual examination and resources. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Spanish Lab is administered the first time a spanish-speaking ELL is admitted/enrolled. Regents Exams are administered in home language throughout the year and NYS Common Core Exams are administered in home language once a year. Students are also provided with a word-to word bilingual dictionary to insure that they understand test. The glossary can be used throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status • Classes are grouped according to ENL or NYSESLAT levels of students. • In class, the ENL teacher differentiates instruction so that students are assisted at various degrees of proficiency levels in English based on the RLAT report on ATS. • A Smart board is used in every ENL and content area class. Using the Smart board, teachers are able to reach students with various learning styles. • The Smart board provides support for multiple learning styles and learning abilities (visual, spatial, auditory or kinesthetic). • The ENL teacher is able to provide small group instruction to struggling learners through the push-in and pull-out services. In small groups, the teacher can conduct read aloud or give students small group instruction in writing. Explanation of Instructional plan for SIFE • Our SIFE students receive instructional support as needed. Our students read and keep reading logs of the various books that they read. Based on student logs, teachers can see where students are struggling and offer support as needed. • SIFE students, like Beginner ELLs are given extra minutes of ENL support through targeted pull-outs by the ENL teacher. Teachers use videos, audio, manipulatives, picture dictionaries, graphic organizers, modified assessments, and native language content in order to support SIFE students and build literacy. • Our school is receptive to having professional development and additional resources that work best for our small SIFE population. Description of plan for ELLs in United States (US) schools less than 3 years (newcomers) • Students who are in the US for less than 3 years are monitored closely to ensure that they are progressing accordingly in all four modalities of the English language (listening, speaking, reading, and writing). • Content area teachers provide native language support in many ways. Students are able to use bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, and textbooks in Spanish. • MS has hired bilingual paraprofessionals to assist ELLs in native language in special education setting. Description of your Plan for ELLs Receiving Services 4 to 6 Years 2018-19 CEP-RISE 87  • The plan for ELLs receiving services for 4-6 years is to increase performance in reading comprehension and writing in order to perform well on the NYSESLAT to either move up to become proficient or exit the program. • This is accomplished by following the instructional model of the school which includes a double or block period of independent reading incorporated in the lesson plan to allow for teaching of specific literacy skills. • Our 4-6 year ELLs also receive Special Education based on the requirement of their IEPs. Throughout the year, students receive services based on their level. However per the state mandate ELLs students are to receive the following minutes (B=540, I=360, and A=180). ELLs student receive the required minutes through push-ins and pull-outs. Students may receive more ENL classes such as additional ENL cultural classes or language support classes. However, all students will receive mandated minutes according to the state requirement. All students are programmed and served their mandated minutes/units of ENL classes. Students are offered Regents prep courses after school in the areas of global history and living environment to help them become successful on upcoming Regents. Long-term ELLs (students who completed 6 years) • We provide strong instruction in reading and writing to help our long term ELLs become skilled readers and writers so that they can become proficient on the NYSESLAT and exit the ENL program. • ENL teacher closely monitor students in all four modalities. Students are provided with small group instruction by the ENL teacher. In small group, students will be provided with writing sessions to develop specific writing skills. • Once students exit the program, we provide them with additional support and continued modifications on exams to 2 years. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs Identified as Students with Disabilities • ENL students with disabilities are served based on the recommendation of their IEPs. • All ELLs with Individualized Educational Plans (IEPs) are programmed for ENL. • All ENL students with IEPs receive the recommend ENL services are programmed for required ENL minutes based on state requirements. • There is a bilingual paraprofessional in special education classes to assist ELLs and give them additional help as needed. • Students with disabilities are programmed for ENL and receive differentiated instruction in the classroom. Students are provided with small group instruction or one-to-one instructional time. • All students, including students with disabilities have to take the NYSESLAT at the end of the year. Therefore, all students receive instruction in order to prepare for the NYSESLAT. Math - GOMath curriculum is used which is common core aligned; NY Ready books are also used for additional support. ELA- Expeditionary Learning curriculum is used which is common core aligned; NY ready books are used for addittional support. Students engage in activities that make real world connections and provide opportunities for experiential learning. Students are active participants in the entire lesson. Students’ understanding of the lesson expectations and content is checked at several points during the lesson. Students are given multiple opportunities to demonstrate understanding. Varied instructional strategies are used during the mini lesson. Abstract concepts are broken down via effective questioning, scaffolding and modeling. Lessons provide multiple entry points for the needs of all learners. Student interests and learning styles are addressed. Strategies such as strategic grouping and the use of technology are used to target instruction for groups of students. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Most ELL-SWDs are placed in an ICT/CTT classroom where they receive core content instruction by two teachers (the General Education Teacher and the Special Ed/Bilingual Ed teacher) for both Math and ELA as mandated in their IEPs. They also receive ICT services by the General Ed Teacher and the ENL teacher for their core content instruction in Humanities. That’s up to 3 periods a day of additional instructional support that they receive. Furthermore, they are pulled out by the ENL teacher for pull-outs depending on their need for targeted instruction. That’s an additional class period of supportive services. The ELL-2018-19 CEP-RISE 88  SWDs that are mandated 12:1:1 environment services are placed in self-contained classroom with a Special Education teacher and a bilingual paraprofessional. ENL teacher pulls these students out for up to 1 period a day. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention services offered: ENL/Bil Ed support in Math and ELA for beginner level 7th graders (push-in). ENL support in Humanities for all ELLs 6th-8th graders (push-in) 6th Grade ENL support integrated in ELA class. ENL small group support for all grades 6-12. (pull outs) Bilingual paraprofessionals for ELL-SWDs in 12:1:1 setting Standardized exams offered in home languages All instruction is in English but support is available for Spanish speaking students. We use effective methods and instructional strategies that are based on scientifically-based research such as increase the amount and quality of learning through Extended Learning Time (ELT) on Wednesday and Thursday in which students are divided into homogeneous subgroups based on their NYSESLAT data. We also do after school tutoring and small group instruction in ELA to support ELL and gen ed students in reading and comprehension. Address the needs of all children in the school, but particularly the needs of low academic achieving children and those at risk of not meeting the State academic content standards and are members of the target population of any program that is included in the School wide Program. These programs may include counseling, pupil services, mentoring services, college and career awareness/preparation, and the integration of vocational and technical education programs. We continue to look at ways of differentiating our curriculum and program offering so that we provide each student with a rigorous educational experience. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? School has hired an ENL teacher, there is also another teacher who received her TESOL certification, we are providing a resource room and freestanding ENL program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Middle School students are invited to join the CIty Year after school program. In this after school program, ELLs will get homework help by a bilingual City Year corps member. they will also be able to participate in a number of enrichment programs in the arts, technology, and sports. High School ELLS can join after school clubs and athletic programs such as Step team, Basketball, Community Service, Yearbook, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. QRI is used to assess students reading levels. Achieve3000 is used in ELA to differentiate instruction through online interactive articles available in English and Spanish. These articles are Common Core alinged and differentiated by lexile for each student. Google Translate is used by many teachers to help them communicate with quick translations during class to help the ELLs understand what’s going on. SmartBoard is used in every classroom to accommodate all learning styles (video, visual, audio, etc.) Students are offered a Mentor In Medicine program during extended learning time. ESL teacher uses "ESL Intermediate/Advanced Writing (English as a Second Language Series)" to services the ELLs. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Freestanding ENL program - students are provided with bilingual Mirriam Webster dictionaries and home language tests. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 89  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The students are grouped by grade level and the ENL services are mostly given through push-in sessions within the corresponding grade level content classes. This ensures the students are receiving common core grade level instruction. In addition we have bilingual and monolingual picture and non-picture dictionaries, thesaurus, and other independent reading books as well as workbooks for all ages. The ENL teacher provides services and monitors that all students are provided their required services and resources. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? QRI is used to assess students reading levels. IReady is used in ELA to identify students's strengths and weaknesses by skill and to differentiate instruction through online interactive articles available in English and Spanish. This program is Common Core aligned. Teachers also differentiate by lexile for each student adn utilize NEWSELA to differentiate reading levels of articles for students. Google Translate is used by many teachers to help them communicate with quick translations during class to help the ELLs understand what’s going on. SmartBoard is used in every classroom to accommodate all learning styles (video, visual, audio, etc.) Students are offered a Mentor In Medicine program during extended learning time. ESL teacher uses "ESL Intermediate/Advanced Writing (English as a Second Language Series)" to services the ELLs. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs have a one-on-one getting to know each other session with the ENL teacher (Ms. Anderson) and/or Bilingual Teacher (Ms. Quezada). They also receive a tour of the school so they can know exactly where their classes take place and where the important offices are (main office, clinic, school counselor, parent coordinator, AP’s office, etc.). The AP Ms. Pushkantser and the parent coordinator Ms. Felix also help with welcoming the newly enrolled ELLs. We hold open house as well as orientation to introduce ourselves and the school, during which time we translate and share information in English and Spanish, as well as other languages if needed. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish and French. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable to BECA because we do not have a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher has 3 years experience of teaching ENL in Austria. In the US, she is being trained at City College through the Teaching Fellowship program. The 6th grade ELA teachers has just completed her licensure to receive an ESL extension. The Special Ed/Bilingual Ed teacher is also mentoring the ENL teacher. All staff will be provided with professional development 1-2 times a month on assessing and instructing ELLs. In these workshops, strategies that help ELL students will be discussed and modeled for the staff in the hopes that they implement them in their classrooms. Staff receive differentiated PD sessions from internal and external facilitators once a month 2018-19 CEP-RISE 90  - Grade Team Leaders and Department Heads meet weekly with the Principal to develop their instructional and leadership capacities - Staff receives PD through DOE and contracted vendors on as needed basis to ensure ability to provide quality service to students -Staff are given CPT time to plan with their SPED or ELL support teachers as well as discipline team meetings and grade team meetings. PD Agenda - September - ESL Services Offered in NYC and at BECA October - Using Technology in the ESL classroom Novemeber - Making connections - Connecting students’ prior knowledge, life experience and interests with learning goals, facilitating learning experiences that promote autonomy, interaction, and choice, and engaging students in problem solving, critical thinking, and other activities that make subject matter meaningful to all learners. January - Differentiation - using a variety of instructional strategies and resources to respond to students’ diverse needs, and promoting self directed, reflective learning for all students. February - Lesson planning - developing and sequencing instructional activities and materials for student learning, and designing short-term and long-term plans to foster student learning April - NYSITELL/NYSESLAT May - Creating new learning goals based on assessments - establishing and communicating learning goals for all students, collecting and using multiple sources of information to assess student learning, involving All staff will be provided with professional development 1-2 times a month on assessing and instructing ELLs. In these workshops, strategies that help ELL students will be discussed and modeled for the staff in the hopes that they implement them in their classrooms. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. When students transition from middle school to high school, their new high school teachers receive the students profiles with select classwork, report cards, and former NYSESLA scores. They can also meet with any of the former teachers from the middle school to discuss best practices for a particular student. Guidance counselor meets with Administrators to discuss how assist ELLs as they transition to MS/HS. Counselors are sent to DOE vendors for PDs on de-escalation techniques, student organizational skills, stress management, and substance abuse. The school meets the PD requirements by hosting specific ELL instruction workshops once a month to all teachers and twice a month for bilingual education/ENL teachers. The Assistant Principal is responsible for keeping records such as agendas and attendance for PD activities in the main office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? ENL teacher keeps track of student performance and parent contact information. If there is any specific concern brought up by the teacher or the parent, the ENL teacher plans an individual meeting with the parent to discuss these concerns or progress. If ENL teacher does not speak the same language as the parent, the parent coordinator requests an interpreter or provide the services herself. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 91  Question 2: All students records are kept in their individual files in the ENL teacher’s office, and parent needs are noted in the file along with student needs. During annual individual meetings, these are referred to in order to determine whether parent needs have been met, and to plan for how to continue to meet those needs. Question 3: All ELL parents are invited to all parent engagement events. At Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Teacher Association meetings, the parent coordinator requests interpreters for parent active involvement. Historically, ELL parents are very involved in the school. They come to the parent meetings and call the school frequently to inquire about their children. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 CEP-RISE 92 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yvette Rivera, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 93  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Early College Academy School DBN: 09X324 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Y. Rivera Title Principal M.Pushkantser Assistant Principal M. Felix Parent Coordinator A. Anderson ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N. Quezada Other Special Ed/Bilingual Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 9/1/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 9/1/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 CEP-RISE 94  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 0 School Name: Bronx Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Avrien Anderson ENL Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on the Home Language Identification Survey, a record of adult preferred languages for written translation and oral interpretation are maintained in ATS: Spanish is the main language; then Bengali, Albanian, and Other - 2%. Copies of said information are shared with our Guidance Counselor, Parent Coordinator, Community Coordinator, and others. All written correspondence between the school and students’ families is provided in the language of their choice, which most often is in their native language. As a result, we use the NYCDOE’s internal translation unit to provide translations of all school correspondence as needed for: a. Announcing important meeting dates (Open School Night, SLT meetings, Family Association meetings, etc.) b. Special events (Thanksgiving Feast, International Festival) 2018-19 CEP-RISE 95  c. Letters of concern about students’ academic performance and behavior d. Letters of congratulations praising student performance and behavior e. Welcome packets for families explaining school rules, mission, necessary supplies, permission slips, and FAQs about school policy, which they receive upon admitting their child to our school . To keep our excel sheet updated, we use information from Blue Cards which are kept current throughout the year. We also cross reference with ATS reports (RELC). 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali French Hindi Korean Mandinka English Punjabi Spanish Soninke Twi 5 2 2 1 3 456 1 305 2 1 .64 .26 .26 .13 .39 58.61 .13 39.2 .26 .13 5 2 2 1 3 456 1 305 2 1 .64 .26 .26 .13 .39 58.61 .13 39.2 .26 .13 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish, English Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 96  Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families a. Announcements for important meeting dates (Open School Night, SLT meetings, Parent Association meetings, etc.) MS back to school night in Sept. translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Letters will be translated internally. SESIS Progress Reports PTA meetings HS back to school night in Sept. SLT meetings are monthly. Meetings and events will utilize interpreters from the DOE. Phone calls will either be done by our Parent Coordinator who is bilingual, or use the DOE interpretation phone line. b. Special events (Thanksgiving Feast, student performances and parent teacher conferences. SESIS reports-October Parent Welcome Night was held on interpreters were requested by 9/17 Parent-Teacher Conferences - . Interpreters will be requested two weeks previous to the events. Senior Parent Night PTA meetings-monthly c. Letters of concern about students’ academic performance and behavior Special events d. Letters of congratulations praising student performance and behavior e. Welcome packets for families explaining school rules, mission, necessary supplies, permission slips, Parent Teacher Conferences-9/28 letters to be sent by 9/15 f. FAQs about school policy, which they receive upon admitting their child to our school Our policy is to request for interpreters and/or to submit documents to the Translation Unit at least 2 weeks previous to all events to ensure enough time for language translation. All letters will be distributed within two weeks of the event in English and the home language/preferred langauge. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 97  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Two weeks prior to the event. MS Open House -September HS Open House -September PTA meetings Parent Welcome Night was held on ; interpreters will be requested by 9/17 Parent-Teacher Conferences - 9/28,/2017, 11/9/2017, 3/8/2018, and 5/3/2018. Interpreters will requested two weeks previous to the events. IEP meetings usually translated by in-school staff (Special Ed Bilingual Teacher, Bilingual Social Worker, Chemistry Teacher, HS English, HS Spanish Teacher, the AP, and the Community Liasion) Our policy is to request interpreters at least 2 weeks previous to all events. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Letters will be translated internally. Meetings and events will utilize interpreters from the DOE. Phone calls will either be done by our Parent Coordinator who is bilingual, or use the DOE interpretation phone line. For Spanish speaking parents we have staff who is able to translate in house as well. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We will reach out to families using our phone system, we also have Kinvolved which allows us to translate and send emails and texts in any language including the families' home languages. We will utilize the DOE translation system in 2018-19 CEP-RISE 98  case of emergency, and google translate as a last resort to ensure that families are notified of any emergencies in a timely manner. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will have an orientation meeting in the beginning of the school year and review expectations and compliance. Our ENL coordinator will also share resources and provide PD on support services for students and families, including how to ensure that families are provided with all necessary information and included in the school community in their preferred language. We will also hold face to face meetings with families and with staff to ensure compliance. Our parent coordinator,in coordination with teachers, counselors, and administration, will check in with families so that they are kept in the loop of all school events, information, and necessary resources. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is a directive on the responsibility that our school system is committed to for the opportunity of equal access to all rights, opportunity, information, and participation of LEP parents in our school. A parent will never be denied access to opportunities afforded their families, or to children enrolled at our school. As a result of these regulations, we have developed systems that will meet the needs of parents of ELLs who speak the predominant second language, Spanish. Additionally, Item B of Section VII in the Chancellor's Regulations relates to the conspicuous posting of DOE covered languages for translation. This appears upon entry to the school near the Security Desk. The school's safety plan provides that parents who need to communicate with the school, does so in their home language. This is determined via the Parents Preferred Language Form, which is available as part of the Family Resources through the Office of ELLs. All school based and consultant agencies will be utilized to this end, including community based organizations that will be instrumental in meeting the language needs of our parents. We also use the notification documents from the Translation and Interpretation Unit’s intranet site: http://intranet.nycboe.net/SchoolSupport/translation_and_interpretation_unit. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys will be given and feedback solicited during monthly PA meetings regarding the quality and availability of interpretation services and of key documents translated into home languages. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 99  BECA does not have a focus group of parents inclusive in all cultures and languages represented at the school, but we strive to reflect the various cultures in our student government. 2018-19 CEP-RISE 100 
