2018-19 COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (CEP-CS) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 07X343 School Name: ACADEMY OF APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND TECHNOLOGY Principal: VINCENT GASSETTO 2018-19 CEP-CS 1  Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Middle School 343/Academy of Applied Mathematics and Technology 320700010343 6,7,8 345 Brook Avenue, Bronx, NY 10454 School Number (DBN): 07X343 (718) 292-3883 Phone Number: (718) 292-4473 Fax: Mr. Vincent Gassetto vgasset@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Mr. Vincent Gassetto Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Abigail Cooper Joanna Muniz Carlos Lopez Sandra Vaca NA NA Geographical District: 7 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Rafael Alvarez Superintendent: 501 Courtlandt Avenue Bronx NY RAlvare4@schools.nyc,gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718 742 6500 Phone Number: 718 742- 6548 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza JRuiz2@schools,nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-827-7776 Phone Number: 718-742-6548 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Vincent Gassetto Abigail Cooper Joanna Muniz Magdalena Pagan Darlene Rosario Anne Marie Hall-Croll Carlos Lopez DesyiCasarrubias *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Staff Member/Staff Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Elena Guzman Latoya Grant Ms. Marina Henry Rita Olivares Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? "MS 343 is a small school committed to providing a meaningful learning experience, focusing on technology, to prepare students for the 21st century."   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Middle School 343, located in the South Bronx, is "a small school with infinite ideas"! We have 305 students in 6th, 7th, and 8th grade combined (with a projection of approximately the same number of students for academic year 2018-2019). Though it is true that our school is located in one of the most “poverty-stricken areas in the poorest congressional district in the United States”, we do not have to become a product of our environment. The job of a middle school includes preparing our students for high school, college, careers, and life, not merely to teach times tables and literary classics during these intermediate or middle years. At the core of our philosophy is the belief that students need exposure to outside places and people and a variety of learning experiences which is why our students visit 3 major North East cities, attend 6-8 Broadway plays, engage with the newest technology, and participate in an extensive arts program while they attend our school. Our school’s principal and assistant principal were both former teachers at MS 343 and bring an intimate understanding of the strengths the school and its surrounding community have to offer, as well as a first-hand understanding of their needs. This interesting history, combined with the drive and energy the administration brings, and a core of highly qualified, dedicated teachers makes 343 ripe for innovative and visionary steps to be taken. Some of the steps we have taken to improve the academic and social improvement of our students include: *Continuing a long-term partnership with Situation Interactive, an online Broadway promoting company which provides our school with tickets to multiple Broadway shows each year. Our 6th, 7th and 8th grades each see 2 shows per year for a combined total of at least 6 shows throughout their middle school experience. We also partner with ASPIRA to help facilitate an extensive academic after school program which includes a hot dinner, homework and supplemental academic support and technology time. Another partner of ours is the Matisse Foundation which supports our extensive arts program. This includes art, dance and music classes for all students during the school day. Additionally, this funding supports an after school art, dance and music performing program which meets twice a week for 2 hours each day. Additionally, we receive a 21st Century grant to supplement our after school activities. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school has approximately 28% SWD as well as 12% ELL with an additional 15% former ELL. Upon examination of the Spring, 2018 NYSESLAT, we learned that the area of focus for our ENL population was writing. The writing modality was the weakest performing of the 4 modalities evaluated on the exam. Upon review of the 2018 NYSELA and NYS Math exams, we found that R.I. 6.1, R.I 7.2, R.I. 8.1 were the areas of focus on the CCLS. The SWD data in math revealed that constructing written responses was the students' area of weakness in math. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Our school has excelled in the area of Trust. Based on our teacher retention rate (92%), unprecedented for DIstrict 7, as well as our Learning Environment Survey. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 07X343 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 300 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 39 36 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 4 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 6 6 School Composition (2017-18) 94.0% % Attendance Rate 94.0% % Reduced Lunch 11.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 69.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.68 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 36.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 35 37 92.9% 1.7% 25.0% 28.3% 0.7% 0.7% 2 23% 3.7 34.4% 80% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our strength as a school community continues to be our inquiry work. Part of the inquiry process is to analyze student work and provide actionable feedback to students to further their growth in specific targeted areas/skills. Our instructional focus for 2018-2019 continues to be to analyze student work on a more consistent basis and to provide actionable feedback to all students resulting in actionable steps taken by students to aid in their own academic growth. Based on several years reviewing student NYSELA and Math data as well as in-house baseline and benchmark exams, we found that our priority need is to move beyond teacher intervention addressing students' various needs. A second priority need is to ensure our own assessments mirror the state assessments in question type and how heavily weighted and how represented standards were on our exams in comparison to state exams. After developing both school-wide systems and departmentalized protocols, as well as putting practices in place to do this analytical work, we realized that some of our assessments were not fully aligned to our curriculum, and therefore did not provide a complete analysis of where our students were academically. Teacher teams examined areas of focus based on NYSELA and Math data from 2018 and looked at the weight given each standard. We cross referenced our curriculum in both subject areas to ensure alignment. For instance, if R.I. 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 bundle (CCLS) represented 35% of the NYSELA for 3 consecutive years, the Humanities department reviewed our in-house assessments to ensure we were regularly assessing those same standards. This alignment gives us useful data that directly informs our teaching - completely based on data. Our teachers then, can provide actionable feedback for these important standards on a regular basis and monitor student growth. Another system we have created to track student assessment data and growth of individual students over the course of their 3 years with us is our in house data bank. We have launched this data bank in the math department and plan to roll it out in all departments over the course of the year, and possibly into 2019-2020 school year. This data bank can be accessed by teaching staff as well as students. Students can access various data points such as NYS assessment data, in-house unit exams, benchmarks and Learning Target data to track their own growth and work on their individualized areas of focus on skills days, during independent work or during after school, etc., not only during instructional periods or when assigned by teachers. This self-monitoring of learning is a new and pivotal point for our school community which will result in increased student performance on these specifically chosen standards and increased self-monitoring of learning by students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2  By April, 2019 Each department (Humanities, Mathematics and Science) will have created a system of assessment that accurately monitors where students are academically (with a focus on the heavily emphasized / major standards) resulting in an increase in student performance by 3% on those specific, heavily emphasized standards. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ● Continue to embed time for teacher teams to meet and discuss assessment plans into the existing “MS 343 Professional Development Weeks” which all teachers attend 4 times per year - initial planning for assessments will take place during summer planning conferences as well as during September 2018's PD Week #1. Humanities, Mathematics and Science teacher teams September, 2018-June, 2019 ● Humanities Department members including 2 "demonstration teachers" who are part of ILT  Model teachers (1 special education math and 1 special ● Mathematics education literacy, ILT members: 2 demonstration literacy teachers, 1 demonstration science teacher and 2 Peer Instructional Coaches from the math department will facilitate the curricula meetings, support their departments' data inquiry time, and model lessons for new teachers when applicable. This team of lead teachers also serves as mentors for our 3rd year/untenured teachers (we have one 1st year teacher at this time). ● A third of the school-wide weekly inquiry time’s professional development will continue to be spent on examining Spring, 2018 student performance data including NY State assessment data, in-house baseline and benchmark data, formative assessments and department lesson study data which in turn will inform the assessment plan as the year progresses - modifications may be made once data are reviewed ● All department members’ common planning time (twice a week) will include time spent on revising curricula, including researching potential instructional changes to be made as well as changes to upcoming assessments to ensure alignment due to students' performance on exams o Specific modifications will continue to be made to the curriculum and subsequent assessments for ELLs and Students With Disabilities - also utilizing feedback and instructional support strategies received from the LPP team (made up of special education and team teaching pedagogues). Department members including 2 "Peer Instructional Coaches", 1 "demonstration teacher", all part of ILT and our LPP "Model Teacher" ● Science Department members, including 1 "demonstration teacher" who is part of the ILT *School's data team members ● Administration *parents and families 4 ● In an effort to support this goal, the Annual Parent-Teacher-Student “Back to School” dinner held in September, 2018 will include: o Quarterly course syllabus – including upcoming assessment dates, course requirements and overview The school-wide Jupiter Grades system, which is an online tool used school-wide to help inform parents and families of their child's standing in their classes, performance on exams and status to be promoted, etc. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PC workshops, monthly calendars, automated phone messenger calls, blog, instagram, Jupiter Grades, Parent-teacher dinner, 4 parent-teacher conferences, mid-quarter progress reports and an active PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Title 1 and 21st Century funding is used for teachers to plan and create common assessment during the summer to ensure all assessment are aligned and ready for the start of the school year.  An SBO was approved (3rd consecutive year) to reschedule part of the 155 minute PD time to 4 "PD Weeks" throughout the school year. During these weeks, Department teams analyze and reflect on their assessment and the data collected to modify curricula.  The Department Leads for Humanities, Math and Science were not given an Advisory Group (every Monday) in order to create more time for them to collaborate and discuss assessments school-wide. Leadership Coach visits monthly to conduct learning walks and meetings with administration   Annual “Summer Bridge Program” addresses potential gaps in incoming 6th grade students as well as existing 6th and 7th graders (future 8th graders) targeted by their teachers  Administration administers surveys to students on reading interests to inform purchasing of multi-leveled books for our sustained silent reading period (meets 4 times a week) I-Ready program utilized in class as well as at the core of our extensive academic after school program   Alignment of incentive and exposure trips, Broadway shows and in-class novels to Humanities curriculum to foster connections for students  Humanities department engaging in lesson study cycles focusing on student work (primary focus of “Rigor”  and “Engagement” Initial professional development sessions and launching of My On program to address reluctant readers, to attain high interest/multi-level book inventory and to promote students engagement with and love of reading Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 5  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019 will have demonstrated at least 1.5% growth on heavily weighted standards. The December "PD Week or PD Week #2" serves as a mid-way point to benchmark our progress toward meeting our goal. This "PD Week" is our mid-point benchmark during which we monitor students' progress before the state testing period. It is a time to take inventory of the data we have reviewed (Baseline data in each department, DRP scores from 1st and 2nd test administrations, and inquiry cycle data each department generates), the modifications we have made, the growth students have shown to date and ultimately, to strategically plan our next steps in meeting this goal by April, 2019. This mid-point in the year is critical for the teaching staff to use available data to support students via Saturday test-prep academies, after school opportunities and other special events targeted at students who have not mastered particular, crucial skills based on the data sources we have used throughout the year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) PD Week time - 4 times per year, teacher teams' common planning time - twice weekly, teacher teams inquiry time - once weekly, additional preparation periods, after school and summer planning sessions, etc. Each of these teacher team clocks of time are attended by administration. In addition, surveys are administered to teachers to better gauge their level of satisfaction with their own performance during these meeting times, their colleagues' performance and additional room for suggestions on how administration can continue to support their efforts in meeting school goals and fostering student success. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? According to our most updated annual attendance data, which is from the 2017-2018 school year, special education students significantly closed the gap between their attendance percentages and those of their general education peers over the course of academic year 2017-18. We also experienced a rise in the special education students' attendance in 2015-16, indicating a 2 year positive trend, bringing the SWD attendance percentage rate to 92%, which is now 2.7% lower than their general ed peers (94.7%). This improvement and the fact that we met the past 2 consecutive year's CEP attendance goals greatly affected the special education students' performances on their state assessments resulting in our school's progress and performance on both NYS math and NYS ELA doubling and even tripling that of our district. This consistency has been our strength over several consecutive years of attendance and academic performance data, as well as when compared with our district peers.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, there will be an increase of the special education student attendance by an additional 1-2 percentage points as measured by the 2018 YTD attendance report data. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Special education students in grades 6,7,8 September, 2018-June, 2019 ● Bilingual Attendance Coordinator (family outreach worker) ● School’s bilingual Guidance Counselor ● Health Clinic staff ● Parents of Special Education students, grades 6-8 ● Bilingual Parent Coordinator ● Administration ● Teaching Staff and support staff Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ● In September, 2018 school will host a meet and greet dinner for our special education parents and families – information on the school’s in-house (mental and physical) health clinic will be disseminated including consent slips (thereby lessening the number of absences due to chronic medical conditions and appointments including a myriad of socio-emotional factors) ● Attendance team will investigate the correlation between programming and attendance data for 1 st period classes (chronic latenesses) as part of the monthly special education meeting after school one Monday/month ● “User’s Guides” previously created by students with the highest suspensions and infractions will be created by students with chronic lateness and absences – the goal is for students to explain some of their road blocks to achieving improved attendance in this “guide” thereby informing the school community so steps can be taken - this guide will be created during both mandated counseling sessions and "at-risk" counseling sessions - with one of the 4 members of the counseling staff; (3 members are from Single Shepherd). ● Advisory groups will continue to be created using attendance data (advisory groups are created with an attendance advisor who monitors monthly attendance reports, gives out certificates and incentives, reaches out to parents). Advisory class meets every Monday morning to set goals, look at the weekly Google calendar, take note of assignments, tests and upcoming school-wide events and update the planners purchased and disseminated to each student at the start of the academic year. ● Attendance “Buddy System” will be created to offer students a peer support network – one student with above average attendance paired with one struggling with attendance which meets every Monday morning during advisory period o Students will be paired based on need, chemistry, age, gender, etc. and will meet as individual pairs as well as in large network 8 groups – facilitated by guidance counselor and Single Shepard counselors *An additional advisory group was created in September, 2018 for a select group of at-risk students. This group meets 5 mornings a week with an advisor who checks the students' attendance, and sets and benchmarks individualized goals (based on behavior, attendance and performance data). 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. PC workshops, calendar, automated calls, blog, instagram, Jupiter Grades, Parent-teacher dinner, 4 parent-teacher conferences, mid-quarter progress reports and an active PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Encouraging after school attendance for this sub-group via an extensive club/enrichment program featuring dance, art, music, media studies, movie-making, gaming, and a budding sports program which is supported by 21st Century, and Title 1 / III funding. School purchased (6th year) School Messenger (automated phone system) to inform parents if their child is late or absent. School created "Point System" that monitors and tracks student attendance (as well as behavior and performance) which is disseminated to parents.    Targeted advisory program – attendance groups with an effort on goal setting and change strategies to improve overall attendance o Monthly incentives, certificates for improvement o Family worker conducting weekly outreach to this sub-group  Use of Jupiter Grades (school’s online grade book) to illuminate the connection between attendance and academic success Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By the February, 2019 attendance review, SWD students' attendance will have risen 1 percentage point, closing the gap with their general education peers. This growth will bring our students in line to meet the annual goal of raising their attendance 1-2 percentage points by June, 2019. In order to meet that annual goal, on the 1st Monday of each month, the previous month's student attendance data for special education students will be monitored by both administration and students' small group advisors. Individual 9  check ins will take place on this 1st Monday (for the previous month's data) between advisor and student (advisee) during the Monday morning advisory period. ● Monthly check-ins take place in weekly advisory sessions (more detailed description above). ● Incentives, prizes, positive phone calls home, certificates given publicly during these weekly advisory sessions. ● Quarterly attendance reports (NYCDOE data via ATS) will be reviewed by administration at the end of each marking period for the previous month(s) attendance data – examine data for trends and patterns such as days of the week, times of the day, programming (is the absence or lateness always when math is programmed for instance), etc. *Once a pattern has been identified, meetings with parents, counselors, advisors, the student and administration will take place to prepare a plan of action - this is an ongoing process that is punctuated by quarterly reporting and analyzing of ATS attendance data Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS weekly and monthly attendance reports as well as Jupiter Grades school-wide system which can be monitored daily/weekly via any Smart device. This system is accessible by all stakeholders (student and parents have login information and teachers and staff can input or check on their students daily. Monday's parent engagement time will also be utilized to update this information online for parents and families to access as well as to print out reports for parents and to make calls to alert parents of updated information. Updates and alerts can also be sent via text. All information from this system can be disseminated in both English and Spanish. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Existing school-wide practices of Inquiry in all departments has consistently been our strength as a school community. This strength has resulted in almost 10 years of increased student performance on all state assessments, doubling and sometimes tripling our district's average, teacher retention of over 90% annually and the highest student attendance rates in our district, most recently reflected by the 2018 state testing data in science, math and ELA. The inquiry work our teacher teams participate in has revealed the crux of the challenge with our ENL and SWD students achieving the same improvement on their NYSELA (Spring, 2018) assessments as their general ed and English dominant peers is writing based. In all assessment data, "constructed response", essays, and other writing based prompts, are the areas of improvement for our ELL and SWD student population. We have determined that additional modifications need to be made to our curricula and assessment practices/systems to ensure all students have access to the content, the teaching strategies and the and therefore more consistent success in writing as measured by both in-house and state assessment data. Because of this writing based priority need, we have decided to utilize the support of our lead and demonstration teachers and other supporting staff with data expertise. These teams meet weekly on Monday afternoons to examine special education and ELL students' data and to examine if and how the curricula are missing gaps that students present in their understanding. One data source the team utilizes is the Dean's removal and anecdotal data which indicated that the majority of student removal, particularly SWDs take place during period 4, the period before lunch. We also used the Spring, 2018 RLAT report showing our ELL students' English acquisition. Though the data show that the longer ELL students remain with us, the better they achieve on the exams, it also indicates that writing continues to be their area of focus. Our Long Term ELLs are mainly in the 6th grade meaning they arrive in our school already toting that "label". Our extensive After school program, and small group reading (in school) programs are provided to these students to promote their language learning and acquisition. Since the priority need is writing for both of these sub-groups, there is a focus on the short response in Humanities using the acronym TREE, which all students are taught in the 1st ELA unit of study. This acronym supports students ability to restate the question or prompt, answer the prompt and provide several pieces of evidence to support that answer. There is simultaneously a focus on the constructed responses in math and the lab report writing in science. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, the Student Emotional Wellness (teacher) team will have met 8 times to research, create, and apply progressive social and emotional wellness practices that improve students' academic performance outcomes as measured by 2019 writing section of the NYS ELA exam data by at least 5%. 1 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? *All social and emotional wellness team members will engage in 3 inquiry cycles *All staff will participate in the share-fest September, 2018-June, 2019 *All members of special education teacher team *Bench- marked by 4 existing Professional Development Weeks built into MS 343's calendar *All members of all departments *Administration *Support staff such as the speech teacher Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  ●The social wellness team meets weekly to research discuss and implement research-based strategies to support special education students' success both academically in the area of writing, and emotionally (ultimately enabling students to focus in class and avoid conflict, etc.). A minimum of 3 inquiry cycles will take place this academic year (length of these cycles is dependent on the team's inquiry question and target group to be examined, however, typically inquiry cycles last from 4-8 weeks. *The mid-year "PD Week" in December (actually PD Week #2) serves as a mid-way point for teams to share inquiry work thus far and to share interventions that have been out in place. The mid-year testing period will serve to benchmark our progress toward meeting this annual goal. *At the close of each inquiry cycle, the team's findings will be turn-keyed to the entire staff to ensure all students have access to the writing curriculum leading to a higher percentage of students in these subgroups reaching proficiency as measured by NYS assessments in the area of writing. *Special education model teacher will use preparatory time, teacher team meeting times, inquiry time, etc. to research and share progressive methodologies and strategies to teach special education students. * Members of the Social emotional wellness team will have the opportunity to observe the model teacher utilizing these research-based strategies via a system of peer inter-visitation with feedback conferences ● Members of each department will also a part of the end of cycle "sharing of best practices" *All staff will participate in sharing of best practices after each of the 3 inquiry cycles is complete and best practices have been 2 determined (review of student performance data to support strategies used) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PC workshops, calendar, automated calls, blog, instagram, Jupiter Grades, Parent-teacher dinner, 4 parent-teacher conferences, mid-quarter progress reports and an active PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Per session will be used to fund teachers that will lead this work as well as per session opportunities for after school research and meetings of the social-emotional wellness team.  Utilization of existing extensive common planning time to foster lesson study process  Alignment of 155 minutes (professional time) to be utilized for lesson study process, analyzing student work  50% of this time (front-loaded at beginning of year) will be centered around PD on identifying trends in student work, creating plans,  Utilization of ILT program – program facilitator works with department teams on "norming", procedures and protocols for looking at student work, lesson study cycle, etc. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, students' writing responses on interim assessments will have improved by at least 3%. Teachers will use the December, 2018 "PD Week" as our mid-point benchmark during which we monitor students' progress both academically in the area of writing, and social-emotionally. This mid-point in the year is critical for the teaching staff to use available data to support students via the lunchtime PEACE program, after school programs, Saturday academies, after school opportunities and other special events targeted at students who have not mastered particular, crucial skills based on the data sources we have used throughout the year (including the school-wide point system). Accountability consists of ongoing professional development for department members to learn to engage in lesson study ● Members will share their results in all-staff meetings ● Administration will observe (formally and informally) lessons that had been designed in a lesson study cycle 3  ● Teachers and Administration will review student performance data based on assessments administered after a lesson study cycle ● Revisions to existing curriculum will take place after each cycle if necessary Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Meeting minutes and Inquiry Based data showing impact on Special Ed students, as well as the "PD Week" share fests the team will use to share findings with the rest of the staff via Google Docs and a shared library/bank of instructional resources such as "Show Me" video recordings that support teachers' ability to differentiate instruction as well as to offer remedial AND advanced learning opportunities for all students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. One of MS 343's historical strengths is a history of communicating with teachers; providing ample meeting time within teachers' programs for common planning and inquiry work (not lunch times or after school - within their daily program); and leveraging leadership as evidenced by our Learning Environment Survey every year and our School Quality Snapshot which displays 4 bars in the area of "Effective School Leadership" . After carefully reviewing these aforementioned data sources as well as in-house quarterly teacher feedback surveys (submitted via Google Docs anonymously), as well as reflecting on both informal conversations and formal cabinet meetings with department leaders in our school, it was determined that our priority need Principal's cabinet needed more time to meet as a team to continue to develop initiatives that would positively affect the entire school community, with an emphasis on student performance on state and local exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019 the Principal's cabinet will have met at least 8 times to monitor the effectiveness of school initiatives and improvement plans and this will result in 75% of students demonstrating improvements in all content areas as measured by school created assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). *Leveraging Leadership: administration has identified key personnel who are part of the Principal's cabinet. These people include the assistant principal, 4 department leaders, 2 Peer Instructional Coaches, and the Dean. It was determined that more meeting time was necessary to ensure delivery of information, initiatives are being established systematically and that the vision of the school is followed and supported in a timely fashion. Therefore a ten meeting a year calendar was initiated. *Principal, AP, and Dean (Administration) *Lead teachers from each of our 4 departments *Creative Programming: The need for more intervisitation between colleagues in the same department as well as other departments has always been a focus at our school. In order to facilitate more intervisitation, an "Open Classroom" cycle was initiated which is scheduled to take place twice during the 2018-2019 academic year. To encourage even more visitation, time has been set aside for department leaders to meet every Monday for 40 minutes. *Each department engages in 2 Japanese Lesson Study cycles annually at MS 343. The Department Leaders will continue this practice and lead it throughout the school year, sharing best practices and findings at monthly cabinet meetings. *Peer Instructional Coaches *parent coordinator *Principal, AP, and Dean (Administration) *Lead teachers from each of our 4 departments *Peer Instructional Coaches *Administration Throughout the course of the academic year, beginning in September upon our return to school and ending in June at the close of the school year *Administration *Department leaders and Peer Instructional Coaches Throughout the course of the academic year, beginning in September upon our return to school and ending in June at the close of the school year - each teaching staff member will visit no fewer than 4 colleagues for an intervisitation. 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PC workshops, calendar, automated calls, blog, instagram, Jupiter Grades, Parent-teacher dinner, 4 parent-teacher conferences, mid-quarter progress reports and an active PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Leveraging resources: administration has identified key personnel who are part of the Principal's cabinet. These people include the assistant principal, 4 department leaders, 2 Peer Instructional Coaches, the parent coordinator, and the Dean. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At our mid-way point, (February, 2019) cabinet meeting, an anonymous Google Docs survey will be administered to all cabinet members. The results of that Google survey will serve to inform the principal of the effectiveness or "perceived effectiveness" of the cabinet by its members. There will be space for new ideas to be surfaced via the survey and those will be shared with the entire group. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The survey results will be partially quantifiable (Leichhardt scale questions) and partially qualitative (narrative and opinion scale questions). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on the 2017-2018 school year Learning Environment Survey, included on our 2017-18 School Quality Snapshot, we earned 3 out of 4 bars in the "Strong Family Community Ties" section. The average percent of positive responses in the Outreach to Parents section of the Learning Environment Survey was 94% and the percent of positive responses in the Parent Involvement in School section was 85%. The need addressed this AY 2018-2019 will be to raise that level to 4 as indicated on the upcoming 2018-2019 School Quality Snapshot. There is a need to continue to strengthen communication with parents and providing parents with opportunities to be involved in the school community. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, 70% of our parents will have logged onto our school wide Jupiter Grades system, enabling them to view their child's grades, behavioral anecdotal notes, "point system" rankings, and other information regarding upcoming assessments, assignments and incentives. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? *Every summer our school hosts a back to school orientation for all new 6th grade students and any incoming 7th or 8th graders and their families. *Parents and families of MS 343 students *Every Fall in mid-September our school conducts a "Meet and Greet" parent-staff back to school dinner held at MS 343. This dinner is open to all families and usually draws about 200 plus participants plus our own school staff for a full sit down dinner. *There are approximately 2 open houses in October (10/11 & 10/13) that the school facilitates for parents of prospective or registered students to attend *Our school staff facilitate well over a dozen organized parent workshops which include some facilitated by teachers and school-based staff on Saturdays throughout the year, with a heavy emphasis on Saturdays in February-April during "test prep" season to encourage parents to bring their children to the test prep sessions while they engage in the workshops. *MS 343 also hosts 4 parent-teacher nights throughout the course of the year (NYCDOE calendar) and offers an "Open Door Policy" which invites parents to visit classrooms and sit in on classes by appointment. *Should a parent require an interpreter for a language other than Spanish or French (staff speak these languages), we would contact the DOE's language translation and interpretation unit at least 2 weeks ahead of time to ensure support for that family. *Throughout the course of the academic year with many of our offerings "front loaded" in an attempt to build relationships early in the year *Administration *Bilingual parent coordinator (access to parents who do not speak English) *bilingual teaching staff (access to parents who do not speak English) *whole teaching staff *trilingual dean (access to parents who do not speak English) *bilingual guidance counselor (access to parents who do not speak English) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 9  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. PC workshops, calendar, automated calls, blog, instagram, Jupiter Grades, Parent-teacher dinner, 4 parent-teacher conferences, mid-quarter progress reports and an active PTA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Jupiter Grades online system for grades, anecdotal, and point system monitoring. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, at least 50% of parents will have logged onto Jupiter grades to view student progress and engaged in reciprocal communication with teachers. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance sheets for each school-wide event, Jupiter Grades. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics    Individualized/leveled sustained silent reading program with teacher-student conferencing interactive, leveled online program interactive, leveled online program  Independent small group Reading Program level  Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment iReady Diagnostic   Targeted  Math Instruction iReady Diagnostic   Individualized/leveled math intervention based on student performance data with teacher-student conferencing interactive, leveled online program Science OmniLearn Social Studies  Daily independent reading period School-wide Non- hands on laboratory experiences with in-house teachers supported by an outside program (supplies an expert and materials for labs)  Individualized/leveled sustained silent reading program with teacher-student conferencing Small Group   Homogeneous  Whole Class Individual and whole Class  Homogeneous  Whole Class Individual and whole Class  Homogeneous Whole Class  During the school day  After School Program  During the school day  After School Program  During the school day Small Group During the school day 1  Weekly School-wide "Non-Fiction Fridays" current events packet built at various levels with a focus on vocabulary and social and global events  Individualized or needs based  Voluntary or encouraged based on observed needs At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Fiction Fridays program  Counseling at-risk (group and individual)  peer support girls and boys (gender-specific) sports programs   based on need;  services delivered during the instructional day  Team; after school/voluntary services delivered during the instructional day  Team; after school/voluntary 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 7 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students will receive free school uniforms, be invited to all before school and after school programs, and have consistent check-ins with the guidance counselor and/or Single Shepherd to monitor status and assistance needed. These students will also receive free school supplies (loaded backpack) as well as independent reading books from the 2 bookfairs we facilitate throughout the year. Families of these students will be reached out to via parent coordinator and the school's family worker on a regular basis. Any surprising trends in attendance or academics, behavior, etc. will be addressed immediately on an "at-risk" basis. Fees for incentive trips and activities will also discretely be covered. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. MS 343 currently has 100% Highly Qualified Teachers on staff. Historically, we retain over 92% of our teaching staff. Last year we retained 19 out of 21 teachers and created 1 additional position. As a small school, our teaching and support staff depend on one another greatly, a situation which lends itself well to collaboration. Part of the administration’s philosophy on teaching and learning is that collaboration, such as common planning and Inquiry time, be built into the framework of our school. If we value something, then we need to make it a part of everyone’s experience at MS 343. One way in which we facilitate collaboration, which is a major draw for highly qualified teachers, is the fact that this time is programmed into the teachers’ daily schedules. The school utilizes a block scheduling program which allows for specific departments to be available for teacher teams. Every teacher at MS 343 has two common planning meetings and one Inquiry team meeting built into their weekly programs (this is in addition to any UFT contractual time). This aspect of our unique program attracts teachers who are serious about their craft and who are looking to improve student outcomes, curriculum design and delivery and to enhance teaching methodologies. Another strategy we use to attract and to retain highly qualified teachers is to pair up all new teachers with a veteran mentor teacher. This pairing involves common preparatory periods and sharing of resources and curriculum. Research shows that 66% of teachers who are mentored in their first years in the profession, stay in the profession and report being more satisfied with their work. Our history indicates that highly qualified teachers stay at MS 343. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). MS 343 continues to utilize both in-house and external PD sources. The in-house PD comes from teachers and staff members that have demonstrated a mastery of specific strategies and pedagogical skills that groups of other teachers need assistance with. Almost a third of our teaching staff is part of the Teacher Leadership Program and serve as either a “Peer Instructional Coach”, PIC, or a “Demonstration Teacher”, DT and are compensated by the NYCDOE 5  accordingly. This validates the work that teachers are doing, promotes leadership and collaboration, as well as providing quality and specific PD. Teachers are encouraged to conduct voluntary intervisitation (as well as suggested) along with department-wide learning walks. Administration also utilizes data reports generated from the Advance system which can easily indicate which teachers are “Highly Effective” or “Effective” in a particular Domain/Component within a Domain which then facilitates intervisitation opportunities. The external PD comes from hired coaches, network liaisons, and both teacher and administration found PD opportunities outside of the school. Teachers are always encouraged to look into PD opportunities that fit their needs and share those opportunities with their colleagues. The administration works with a leadership coach, network liaisons, and colleagues on instructional and leadership practices. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 6  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 4, 5 4, 5 4, 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 237,953.00 0 11,200.00 0 1,924,133.00 X X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 7  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Middle School 343/Academy of Applied Mathematics and Technology, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Additionally, the school's 8th grade contract will include a component involving parents' required log in to our Jupiter Grades system initially with the PC's support . This mandate will ensure easier access to the system by parents as well as more frequent usage by the parents ensuring better outcomes for the ir children. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Middle School 343 will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments in both English and Spanish and in other languages that can be translated by the NYCDOE’s interpretation services and/or school-based staff who are multi-lingual; 9  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community conducts an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a bilingual Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent  Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; technology training; resume writing; introduction to the school’s online Jupiter Grades System (involves logging on to teachers’ grade books via internet with a password) to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 0  to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help.    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents in English, Spanish and lower incident languages whenever possible;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written, online/digital and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress as well as a school webpage, Twitter account, Instagram and individual teacher’s class pages;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Middle School 343, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by:  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas; respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 1  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; 2 I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Provide general support to parents by:    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2. II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities:     attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; 3   try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 4  Addendum: Community School Partnerships Directions: The Community School (CS) strategy is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. Community Schools bring schools and community partners together and integrate academics, health, youth development, and family engagement to provide students with the tools and opportunities they need to succeed. The Core Services in Community Schools are Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness. Part 1 – Community School Partnerships Goal(s) How is the CS strategy integrated into academic instruction at your school, and what impact has it had on student academic outcomes? Our Community School Partner, Creative Connections works primarily with our expansive arts program both during and after the regular school day. The arts program includes art, dance and music instruction as well as a performance component after school. According to last year's high school acceptance data, 8 of our 100 eighth graders were accepted to performing arts high schools which was a great accomplishment. Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Given our previous year's achievement of having 8 students accepted into performing arts high schools, our goal is to increase that number to 10. This would represent 10% of our 8th grade graduating class. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Annual Goal(s): How will achieving your Community School Goal(s)--in Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness--support your academic goals for students? One of the ways we engage our students academically, emotionally and socially throughout the school year is through the arts program, our varied and engaging after school arts program and our social emotional wellness initiatives. These combined efforts have proved to increase our daily attendance (as evidenced by our annual attendance rate which is at the top of the district), as well as our yearly increasing after school program attendance rate. These data show we are on target to meet our goal of having 10 students accepted into a performing arts high school. Part 2 – Community School Partnerships Core Services Action Plan Part 2a. Identify the Community-based Organization (CBO) partnerships that you will develop in ELT, Attendance Supports, Family Engagement, and Health & Wellness, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBOs should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Creative Connections Creative Connections Target Population all arts students Scope of Service SY18-19 SMART Goal academic enrichment, social emotional learning. To increase our acceptance rate to performing arts high schools from 8 to 10 students by June, 2019. all after school arts students academic enrichment, social emotional learning. To increase our acceptance rate to performing arts high schools from 8 to 10 5  N/A N/A Part 3 – Budget and Resource Alignment students by June, 2019. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Part 3a. Indicate resources your Community Partnership will leverage to achieve your summative SMART goal(s) and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 21st Century after school grant money. School budget per session money. Part 3b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 3c. Describe how the school will partner with the Lead CBO to do the following: 1. Community Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Community Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Community Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Community School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. 2. 3. 4. Our school's partnership with Creative Connections supports parent engagement through two performances each year that parents and families are invited to attend. These performances showcase students work in the after school arts programs. Creative connections also supports our students with audition preparation, portfolio preparation and other prep necessary for acceptance into performing arts high schools. 6  Part 4 – Community School Partnerships Oversight Part 4a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Justin Carlisle is the lead point person between our school and Creative Connections. He meets regularly with the AP and parent coordinator at MS 343. These regular meetings include plans of action to support the arts teachers both during and after school, creative ideas to support students in their quest to be accepted to a performing arts high school, such as additional rehearsal time, portfolio review, etc. Mr. Carlisle also meets with parents and families during PA meetings monthly to present ideas and inform parents of open house events, etc. at high schools. Part 4b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Our biggest need is meeting time and space for community partners given that we are a campus and share auditorium and music room space with 2 other schools. This sometimes limits access to those areas for students to get extra time with teaching staff, etc. Part 4c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Both the school day and after school arts program run throughout the school year with the mid-year show scheduled for December, 2018 and the end of year show scheduled for May, 2019. Part 4d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this S/CEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: After review of Spring 2017 NYSESLAT data, (which at this point is our most recent data) it was determined that our ENLs would benefit from both a targeted after school program as well as a Saturday academy before the upcoming year's state exams in Spring, 2019. MS 343's after school and Saturday academies are directly aligned to ENL students' strengths and areas of focus (data) based on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT, Spring 2017 ELA data (when applicable), teachers' qualitative classroom data such as conferencing, unit exams, quizzes and students' 100 Book Challenge reading level. After reviewing the data, our ESL teacher, lead literacy teacher and ESL certified assistant principal discovered that the writing modality continues to be the biggest area of focus for all of our students, (followed closely by listening). **If the Spring, 2018 NYSESLAT data reveal different results, modifications to the ENL students' curricula will be made. In response to this finding, we have designed an after school program and a Saturday academy program with these students' needs in mind. The after school program, which will begin in February, 2019 and run until May, 2019 will meet once a week from 3-5:00pm for a total of 11 sessions. The Saturday academy program will meet from 9:00-12:00 pm for a total of 15 sessions. This program will service 6th, 7th, and 8th grade ENL students. Our after school and Saturday class topics are based on need as indicated by student performance both in class and on . Classes range in size from 12-18. In addition, the ESL teacher, lead literacy teacher and ESL licensed AP collaborate on lessons and student materials that will be used to prepare ENLs for their spring, 2019 state exams. Some of the materials that the teacher uses for the Saturday academy lessons include the online iReady program, Measuring Up student workbooks, Ready assessments and American Reading Program's '100 Book Challenge' independent reading program and accompanying skills cards and conferencing manual for teachers (IRLA). The teacher conducts English language lessons and provides academic support/language acquisition support using materials such as "iReady", online tutorial program, sustained silent reading with conferencing, and the use of a short response rubric the literacy department created to bring 6th, 7th and 8th grade ENL students through the writing process in a sequential, coherent way (given that writing is the biggest weakness our ENLs face, according to data). They teach an ESL/ELA mini-lesson on a particular writing strategy or topic, and use materials and guided instruction, as well as independent practice to support the acquisition of these skills. In addition to these books and strategies, the teacher compliments the regular day's instruction on Saturdays by using the 100 Book Challenge protocol in English from the American Reading Company. This protocol includes sustained silent reading to promote stamina, vocabulary development, as well as one on one conferencing with ENLs to ensure growth and to check for reading comprehension. The combination of the regular day's instruction and the Saturday components strongly support the ENLs linguistic development and help prepare them for their many state assessments, as well as school-based assessments and tasks. 9  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We have one certified ESL teacher at MS 343. Professional development takes place with both school-based professionals as well as from contracted experts. The ESL certified teacher at 343 has two "common planning" meetings built into her weekly program during which Title III PD sessions can be delivered. Both of these meetings are attended by the assistant principal, also a certified ESL teacher. This aspect of our unique program enables teachers within a department to share best practices, lesson plan together, look at ENL student data as a team and make instructional decisions in a uniform, consistent way. Our ESL teacher in particular is able to improve the outcomes for her ENL students, design her own curriculum modifications and build in scaffolds with the support of the assistant principal and the literacy department lead teacher, and enhance her teaching methodologies. There is a series of PD sessions facilitated in order to support the ESL and literacy certified teachers in preparation for the Saturday Academy. ****Some of the titles of the PD topics presented to the Title III Saturday academy teachers include 'Sharing Best Practices with Colleagues' (D. Callahan, ESL certified AP), 'Facilitating Student to Student Conversation in the Classroom' (P. Palmer, literacy licensed lead teacher) which supports ENLs' speaking and listening strengths, 'Unpacking the Learning Objective', and 'Scaffolding Grade-wide Novels for ENLs and SWDs' (D. Callahan, ESL certified AP). Additional topics include 'Using Student Outcomes & Data (both qualitative and quantitative) to Inform Instruction and to Make Curricular Adjustments' (D. Callahan & A. Fuller, ESL licensed teacher and ELA/ESL department lead teacher), 'CCLS Review and Curriculum Design' (Humanities/Literacy Department Lead Teacher)**** All of the aforementioned PD titles are directly realted to the supports the ESL teacher will provide her students. The utilization of student data to inform her groupings, the topics and skills she will teach on each Saturday session and the number of students invited to attend each session will all be informed by this data. Scaffolding grade-wide novels is essential for ELL students' language and content acquisition and promotion to the next grade. In addition to the PD titles listed above and the two meeting times our ESL teacher has built into her weekly program (mentioned above), our ESL teacher also attends one instructional PD meetings at the end of the day on Mondays. This meeting is entirely focused on student data and its implications on instruction during which she can make modifications to the department's curriculum and materials for her specific students. Many of these PD opportunities are facilitated by the (ESL certified) Assistant Principal as well as one of our lead (literacy licensed) Humanities teachers, who is also a Demonstration Teacher. Additional sessions listed above are facilitated by our school's Peer Instructional Coach (PIC) including "Writing Coherent and Measurable Learning Objectives". At MS 343 we also offer our ESL teacher numerous PD opprtunities out of the school building, including Teacher's College workshops, Grant Wiggins curriculum design workshops, as well as PDs specifically designed for teachers of ENLs offered by the Department of English Language Learners, all aligned with our After School and Saturday programs' goals and rationale. 0  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: MS 343 has historically had very positive and strong relationships with our families and our community. Our school truly embodies what it means to be a community school and our annual learning environment illustrates the satisfaction of our parents and guardians. In order to continue the positive relationships MS 343 staff have created with our parents and families over the years, many steps have been taken. For instance, numerous workshops are offered annually and a monthly calendar is distributed to all families to inform them of the upcoming events they may wish to attend. This monthly calendar is distributed along with the use of an automated phone call system to inform the parents of upcoming events both during the school day, after school hours and on Saturdays. Some of the events include: • Open Computer Lab Days: Providing parents of ENLs with ongoing access to computers to monitor their child's academic performance including the school-wide Jupiter Grades system (online teachers' grading system) *Hosting a parent orientation (in English and in Spanish) in late August, 2018 for newly admitted 6th graders and transfer students in 7th and 8th grades to explain the philosophy, vision and procedures of our school including the 100 Book Challenge reading program, the home reading log, the school-wide point system and its incentives and consequences as well as other relevant topics for parents (the home reading log is of particular import to our ENL students as they must increase their vocabulary in order to raise their reading comprehension in English to grade level *Hosting a parent-teacher "Back to School" dinner in mid-September, 2018 to give teachers and families a chance to meet in a non-evaluative way to discuss the goals and expectations of each child in our ESL program • Jupiter Grades workshops (how to use the program, login in and emailing their child's teachers), and other engaging workshops such as resume writing, using technology, yoga and wellness, nutritional cooking, etc. Some of the steps taken to ensure open communication with our parents continues, include: Purchasing the aforementioned web-based grading program called "Jupiter Grades" which allows parents access to their children’s grades on a regular basis. This program can be accessed in English or Spanish and reports can be printed at the teachers' discretion in English or Spanish, in whichever language the parents identified as the one they would like to receive information from the school. Each September the school sends home a survey asking parents and guardians which language(s) they are most comfortable communicating in to better foster open dialogue between home and school. In addition, we have facilitated numerous training sessions for teachers and parents to use the Jupiter Grades program, and providing "open lab days" (previously mentioned) for parents who do not have access to the Internet to come into the school and utilize the computers in the computer lab with the support of the bilingual parent coordinator. 1 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 07 School Name Academy of Applied Mathematics and Techn Borough Bronx School Number 343 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Vincent Gassetto Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Althea Fuller Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Abigail Sackey Superintendent Ms. E. Alvarez Assistant Principal Deirdre Callahan Coach type here School Counselor Marisol Palau Parent Ruth Martinez Parent Coordinator Angela Cunningham Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 305 3 Total number of ELLs 27 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 8.85%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The Academy of Applied Mathematics and Technology has a total of 27 English Language Learners (formerly called ENLs, presently called ENLs). 9 students are currently in grade 6, 12 in grade 7 and 6 are in grade 8. All ENL students enrolled at M.S. 343 participate in free standing ESL classes based on Parent choice. According to 2016 NYSESLAT data, which is our most recent data, writing (followed by listening) are our modalities to focus on. Academic Year 2016-2017 was our 2nd year in the MSQI program. Part of this program includes small group literacy support, including the administration of the DRP reading assessment. We administer the DRP reading assessment to ALL students at MS 343 in the beginning, the middle and toward the end of the school year. Results are reviewed each time and a report is generated for parents, for ENL/ELA teachers and for the students themselves. This proficiency report gives a raw score and 4  the corresponding level (1, 2, 3, 4). It also provides the reader with the goal score to have the ENL student at grade level by the end of their time in middle school. For example, a student might have scored a 38 on attempt #1, a 40 on attempt #2, and a 46 on attempt #3 over the course of the school year. The report would include that the student needs to score a 51 on the next assessment to be on his/her way to grade level proficiency by the time they graduate middle school. This is an incredibly powerful tool not only for teachers, but for students themselves, and another way to deliver information to parents. These data are used to form small group reading groups - new groups are designed annually based on these data. For instance, in academic year 2016-2017 40% of our incoming 6 th graders were scored at "Severely below" grade level in reading. The Small Group reading groups were made with intervention strategies and appropriate teachers in mind. Each low performing "severely below" group will include no more than 12-15 students. This DRP data will support the ENLs' reading development as they will be grouped according to data, be grouped homogeneously and with an ENL literacy teacher who knows strategies to support reading and who will conference with them on on one to assign reading goals and monitor growth and progress. In addition, ELL students are administered a pre-test before each new instructional unit, as well as a post-test to determine strengths and areas of focus throughout the academic year on discrete CCLS standards and sub-standards. If students do particularly well on a certain unit, or with a particular skill, they are able to move to the next topic or work at a more advanced pace, or even independently on tools such as iReady and other computer-based adaptive software we offer. However, if ELL students show areas of focus (weakness) in a certain area, they are given more support and scaffolding by the ENL teacher. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? This DRP diagnostic is administered 3 times a year as per our school's assessment calendar submitted to the school district Superintendent. These data will support the ENLs' reading development as they will be grouped according to data, be grouped homogeneously and with an ENL literacy teacher who knows strategies to support reading and who will conference with them on on one to assign reading goals and monitor growth and progress. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? When data is received, administration and the Principal's cabinet review and determine areas of weakness, gaps and flags. An area of weakness may be addressed with an instructional shift or by using a "change strategy", something a team of teachers vows to include in their practice for a set amount of time. Once data is collected, the success of that program or strategy can better be determined. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our entire staff reports to a weekly inquiry meeting with their respective departments. During these meetings, student performance data are reviewed and the inquiry cycle is followed. An area of weakness may be addressed with an instructional shift or by using a "change strategy", something a team of teachers vows to include in their practice for a set amount of time. Once data is collected, the success of that program or strategy can better be determined. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. According to our data, writing is the area of focus most concerning to our ELL instructional team. In an effort to address the writing needs of the ENL students at MS 343, a "Writers' Bootcamp" was devised after school for 3-5 data depending on the needs which surface once data are reviewed. This "Bootcamp" takes place each fall and will continue this September, 2017 once baseline exams are administered to all incoming 6th graders. This "Bootcamp" focuses on the data from a writing baseline the students take the first full week of school. The team scores the writing assessment and breaks the students into groups depending on their weakest area on the writing rubric (adopted from the NYSELA writing rubric). After school intensive 5  sessions are then taught focusing on those areas of weakness, allowing students to have individualized attention, practice working on their deficiency and time to rewrite the original piece once a series of writing mini lessons has been conducted. In addition, if the trend continues, writing will remain the year-long focus for our ENLs, including being at the forefront of the humanities department's inquiry focus for the year. The team will focus on short response writing in particular, administering pre and post tests (baselines and benchmarks), scoring them, reviewing the data and creating instructional change strategies to address deficiencies or gaps in ENLs understanding. This cycle repeats itself every 4-6 weeks with a new strategy being adopted by all teachers of ENLs to be able to test the validity of the strategy. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The team scored the writing assessment and broke the students into groups depending on their weakest area on the writing rubric (adopted from the NYSELA writing rubric). After school intensive sessions were taught focusing on those areas of weakness, allowing students to have individualized attention, practice working on their deficiency and time to rewrite the original piece once a series of writing mini lessons had been conducted. In addition, writing remains the year-long focus for our ENLs, including being at the forefront of the humanities department's inquiry focus for the year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In AY 2016-2017 we had 27 ENLs on register. After reviewing the ENL student data available via NYSELA and NYSESLAT modality data, the ESL instructional team reviewed patterns and trends. Historically, the majority of our students score at the previously titled "Intermediate" and "Advanced" levels, with their weakest areas (again, historically) in Listening and Writing. All ENLs are grouped in the ESL certified teacher's classes for ESL and/or ELA depending on their NYSESLAT level, and according to CR-Part 154 minutes. The program at MS 343 is block scheduling so all ENLs receive blocks of their instruction as a whole class, not a "pull out" or "push in" model. They travel to ESL/ELA as a group and are grouped for other subjects according to strengths and areas of focus as per testing data and ATS. All teachers at MS 343 in all subject areas are provided with an "ENL Strengths and Areas of Weakness" chart devised by the instructional administrative team which outlines each ENLs' current NYSESLAT score as well as their 2 previous year's scores. The chart also includes their modality of strength and their primary and secondary area of focus. Additionally, included in this chart is a bank of instructional strategies to be employed for each of the 4 modalities, should an ENL have any combination of these in their personal strengths and weaknesses on the chart. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELL students receive ESL/ELA from our certified ESL instructor. Each student has more than the minimum number of ESL minutes provided to them in their programs through the use of block scheduling school-wide. Instructional periods are longer than in typical schools' periods (i.e. our instructional periods are 75 minutes long versus the typical 45 minute period in most DOE schools, allowing for more then the required number of minutes to be met. Additional 40 minute advisory meetings 6  (weekly) and additional 40 minute reading periods (daily, 4x per week) are provided to all ENLs by the ESL certified teacher. For instance, students at both the "Entering" and "Emerging" proficiency levels receive ESL instruction from our ESL teacher 5 days/week for 75 minutes, totaling 375 minutes (more than the 360 mandated minutes). In addition, these students receive weekly advisory from the ESL teacher for 40 minutes and a reading period four days/week for 40 minutes, providing a grand total of 575 minutes of instruction from the ESL teacher. The students at the "Transitioning" and "Commanding" proficiency levels also receive 375 minutes of ESL instruction from our ESL teacher which is far more than the 180 mandated minutes as per CR Part 154. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENLs in subject area classes are supported through a wide array of technology, such as headphones, books on tape, both illustrated content-specific glossaries and word-to-word translated glossaries for all content areas, multiple carts of 30 laptop computers each in all departments are made available to students to conduct research, use websites and to get visual and interactive instructional support. Every teacher also has a "Document Camera" and Smart Board in their room to ensure scaffolded, visual representations of content information. Teachers of ENLs attend 2 common planning meeting per week which are visited by the AP (ESL certified) at least 75% of the time to provide ESL strategies and support in delivering instruction. PD is also afforded to teachers of ELLs both in and out of school on topics of curriculum design using UBD/Grant Wiggins's design, and scaffolding techniques to make vocabulary more accessible to ENLs. Technology support such as PD in the MyOn online reading programs is also made available to teachers of ENLs as are the iReady programs in math and ELA. All teachers of ENLs attend the 4 mandatory PD weeks annually at MS 343 (aforementioned) which focus heavily on vocabulary instruction and language acquisition for ENLs. As ESL is provided in a contained class to each grade, 6 th , 7 th , 8 th individually, the ESL teacher does not provide push-in services. The extensive PD provided to the teachers of ENLs gives support and guidance, as does the ESL certified AP of instruction. ELL instruction is supported through a variety of scaffolding techniques including color-coding our vocabulary into parts of speech (red=verb, blue=noun, etc.), scaffolded graphic organizers, close reading strategies, finding the gist strategies and student-teacher conferences with ENLs are utilized regularly to check for understanding. AT MS 343 we have no identified SIFE students to date, but in the case of a new arrival, steps would be taken to ensure both academic and social success. SIFE students would be assigned an advisor to check in with them on academic success, attendance and to give them an academic planner to record assignments and to help with organization skills. The parent coordinator, Ms. Cunningham would meet with the parents of SIFE students on a monthly basis to check on progress reports, report cards and attendance. Newcomers would receive these same services to ensure assimilation to the school and support in adjusting to their new environment. An advisory group would be created with these students which would serve as a support group with an ESL teacher facilitating. ENLs who are approaching LTE status are grouped with the ESL teacher for both "small group reading class" (also known as 37.5) and Targeted Instruction (or AIS services) to support their language acquisition before the reach LTE status. Once they have arrived at LTE status, or if they arrive at MS 343 already a LTE, they are designated for our after school program specifically for LTEs. This class after school is taught by a certified ESL teacher and uses NYSESLAT prep materials to support all 4 language modalities. ENLs with special needs are accommodated in accordance with their IEP. If ENLs require additional support, the advisory program members are consulted and the ESL instructional team is consulted. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Historically, our ENLs have almost exclusively been Spanish speaking. With no current data to dictate otherwise, the students' evaluation in their home language would be conducted by the bilingual guidance counselor or one of our bilingual teaching staff members. Teacher-student conferencing is the main instructional tool utilized at this point to evaluate students' abilities in their home language. The iReady program is another tool the school utilizes as it is an online program that tracks growth and proficiency and can provide quantitative data to support the qualitative conferencing data. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 7  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status ELL instruction for SIFE (should we register a student with that status in the future), Newcomer and Developing language learning students is supported through a variety of scaffolding techniques including color-coding our vocabulary into parts of speech, scaffolded graphic organizers and "shoulder buddies", who are students at a more proficient linguistic level who can help ENLs during group work. Our data shows that we have 5 students in all grades combined at the Entering or Emerging stages. These students receive modified curricula by the ESL teacher. They extensively use technology as a support, for books on tape, pre-recorded "Show Me" videos created by the teachers in subject areas and voice recordings of their teachers reading aloud instructions, articles and other instructional supports. Teachers also conference with ENLs regularly to check for understanding. At MS 343 we have no identified SIFE students - however enrollment data for 2017-2018 is not complete, but in the case of a new arrival, steps would be taken to ensure both academic and social success. SIFE students would be assigned an advisor to check in with them on academic success, attendance and to give them an academic planner to record assignments and to help with organization skills. The parent coordinator, Ms. Cunningham meets with the parents of ENLs students on a monthly basis to check on progress reports, report cards and attendance. Regarding LTEs, they are specifically targeted for an after school program with the ESL teacher. This program runs from October-May and meets twice a week after school from 2:45-3:00, which includes a 15 minute snack. We also offer Saturday test-prep academies on a variety of topics (each Saturday the topic changes based on student data). Often different groups of ENLs are invited based on their most current performance data to ensure needs are met and students don't become overwhelmed or exhausted by a year-long Saturday program. The students are "invited" based on their performance data and the topics are chosen once students' data are reviewed for patterns and trends. Newcomers and Developing language learners would receive these same services to ensure assimilation to the school and support in adjusting to their new environment. An advisory group would be created with these students which would serve as a support group with an ESL teacher facilitating. ENLs who are approaching LTE status are grouped with an ESL teacher for both "small group reading" (also known as 37.5) and AIS services to support their language acquisition before the reach LTE status. Once they have arrived at LTE status, or if they arrive at MS 343 already a LTE, they are designated for our after school program specifically for LTEs. This class after school is taught by a certified ESL teacher and uses NYSESLAT prep materials to support all 4 language modalities. Former ENLs continue to receive accommodations ensured by the testing coordinator. This information is disseminated to the staff and is referred back to periodically throughout the year whenever a school-wide exam is being administered in a class/subject area and in the case of state testing. Additionally, ELLs with special needs are accommodated in accordance with their IEP. If ENLs require additional support, the advisory program members are consulted and the ESL instructional team is consulted. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL instruction is supported through a variety of scaffolding techniques including color-coding our vocabulary into parts of speech, scaffolded graphic organizers and "shoulder buddies", who are students at a more proficient linguistic level who can help ELLs during group work. Teachers also conference with ENLs regularly to check for understanding. At MS 343 we have a small number of SWDs who are also ENLs. We have no current data to inform our plans for the 2016-2017 AY, though NYSESLAT and NYSELA data are expected over the summer and will be used to plan instruction for 2017-2018. Steps are always taken to ensure both academic and social success. SWDs who are also ENLs will be assigned an advisor to check in with them on academic success weekly, attendance and to give them an academic planner to record assignments, and to help with organization skills. The parent coordinator, Ms. Cunningham meets with the parents of this subgroup of students on a monthly basis to check on progress reports, report cards and attendance. An advisory group is created each September with these 8  students in mind, which serves as a "support group" of sorts with an ESL teacher facilitating. This group of students is also invited to attend our extensive after school program. This class after school is taught by a certified ESL teacher and uses NYSESLAT prep materials to support all 4 language modalities. ENLs with special needs are accommodated in accordance with their IEPs. Some of the ways in which we support ENLs at MS 343 is through the extensive use of technology. Our ESL teacher has her own set of 30 laptops kept in a cart in her room. The students have ready access to the technology to use purchased programs like iReady and MyOn and also to use online dictionary sources and other tools. If ENLs require additional support, the ESL instructional team is consulted. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? At MS 343 we have 27 ELLs on register to date. After we reviewed the ELL student data available which is last year's (2015's) - NYSELA and NYSESLAT modality data, the ESL instructional team identified patterns and trends. All ENLs receive ESL/ELA from our certified teacher according to CR-Part 154 minutes. The students receive free standing ESL/ELA instruction. The program at MS 343 is block scheduling so all ENLs receive blocks of their instruction as a whole class. They travel to ESL/ELA as a group and are grouped for other subjects according to strengths and areas of focus/testing data. Block scheduling allows for longer instructional periods (typically 65-75 minutes each) and allows for the ESL teacher to see larger groups of ENLs in a contained setting daily. This ensures that all ENLs receive more than their mandated number of minutes as per CR Part 154. In addition, the block scheduling allows for SWDs to be in mixed settings for art, gym, music and dance as well as for Targeted Instruction classes which all students take 4 times a week. These classes include Regents preparation, Specialized High School Prep, Technology/computers and other courses specifically designed to meet students' needs. Groups are heterogeneous and allow for SWDs to take classes with students who are not typically in 12:1 settings expanding their exposure to non SWDs. In addition, all after school programs including clubs, academics, trips and sports (extracurricular) are mixed groups and are open to ALL students at MS 343. In some instances, SWDs who are performing at a higher level than their 12:1 peers take classes with the ICT team. This has been done several times with 12:1 students with much success. Students at 343 take classes they need and classes that match their performance levels and help support their goals. If those classes happen to be ICT, then parents are called for a conversation about the possibility of transitioning their child and once permission is granted, students are immediately transitioned into these classes with additional support provided by guidance and service providers when necessary. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. For school year 2016-2017 M. S. 343 continued, and will always continue to utilize block programming. This means that students will be scheduled in sections of English Language Arts, English as a Second Language, Mathematics, Small Group Reading and Targeted Instruction classes based on their strengths, needs and areas of focus evidenced in the Spring, 2016 NYSESLAT report and the 2016 ELA data (scores have not yet been received - only "met" or "did not meet"). ENL students will be serviced by a certified ESL teacher during the humanities blocks as well as during Small Group Reading periods, advisory, extended day and after school programs. All instructional components will be taught in the English language. In an effort to develop the language skills and fluency of our ENL population at M. S. 343, we will use the Workshop model which follows all Balanced Literacy components, (researched-based), such as the Read Aloud, Shared Reading/Writing, Independent Reading/Writing and Guided Reading/Writing. In addition to the Workshop Model, we incorporate audio/visuals, listening centers, multi-level classroom libraries, process charts, graphic organizers, technology, and manipulatives. ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT will continue to receive ELA instruction or additional AIS services from a certified ESL teacher for 2 years. Some curriculum adjustments have been made to the ESL curricula, including, but not limited to the infusion of the Expeditionary Curriculum, Understanding By Design lesson plan format with Essential Questions, and class novels that align with our curriculum topics to promote literacy skills in our ENLs. 9  The instructional and administrative team(s) have decided to continue with our existing programs such as iReady, Expeditionary Learning, CMP3 math curriculum, and others, while adding new, high interest novels at a variety of reading levels, MyOn reading program and an MSQI literacy diagnostic, the DRP, and a support coach to support teachers. Teaching strategies that will be used to meet the different needs of our ENL students are: modeling, total physical response, repetition, hands-on instruction, small group instruction, individualized instruction and pair-share activities. Our English Language Learners will be encouraged to participate in the Test prep classes and the after school small group instruction with a focus on differentiating instruction. NLA support is provided through the use of illustrated glossaries (Eng to Span), NYS sanctioned word to word glossaries (Spanish, French, Arabic and others), online translation programs via laptops, and baskets of native language books in classrooms. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For AY 2016-2017 the school purchased "My On", an online reading program which enables students to take an interest survey to determine genre interests and reading ability. Students then had access to an archive of thousands of books which enables them to read at their own level, at home or in school during the school's silent reading period (4x a week for 35 minutes). In addition, MS 343 just completed its 2nd year as an MSQI school which allowed us the opportunity to utilize a literacy "coach" to help support teachers' understanding and application of reading strategies to help lower performing students reach proficiency in reading and language development. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? According to our most recent 2015 ELL data, the majority of our ENLs improved at least 1 level on the NYSESLAT exam. Our returning ENLs therefore require fewer "minutes" of instruction as per CR Part 154. Their school program (schedule) however, remains the same, with ENLs receiving a full program of ESL/ELA from our ESL certified teacher. In addition, ENLs receive reading support from our ESL certified teacher during our 100 Book Challenge/ Small Group Reading period which meets 4X a week with the ESL teacher. This instructional period is solely focused on reading strategies, conferencing and assigning "Power Goals" for the students to work on to promote vocabulary and language acquisition as well as reading fluency. The DRP (Degrees of Reading Power) data are used to form these groups. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All services, extra curricular, after school academic and sports and clubs programs are offered to ELLs. All exposure trips such as numerous Broadway plays, trips to East Coast cities like Philadelphia and Washington, D.C., and other incentive trips are all offered to ENLs. Informational brochures are created for ENL students to use to better understand the context of the play (for instance - Elizabethan language explained for ENLs in anticipation of seeing Romeo and Juliet, historical context broken down for ENLs seeing Les Miserables, or visiting our historical Mecca, Philadelphia, etc.) In addition, Saturday school is offered to ENLs, and ENL students are specifically invited to these enrichment academies as well as to dance, art, music clubs, and sports teams to support their language and skills development. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. MyOn online reading program, Lightsail online reading program, laptop computers, high interest/various leveled texts, Expeditionary Learning Curriculum, Workshop model, Smart Boards and document cameras in each room, iPads in each department, iReady program, Achieve 3000 reading program, etc. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ENLs are encouraged to use the NLA classroom libraries in each literacy classroom, as well as participate in the cultural trips offered to bilingual students. Cultural and enrichment trips are offered to ENLs with bilingual chaperones to support understanding, and to enrich their experiences. Parent workshops and parent PD is also offered regularly on Saturdays - students are invited to participate along with their parents and families. Some of the topics include technology PD, crafts, card making, resume writing, yoga and Zumba, museum trips, college and university tours, and other culturally significant events. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 0  All required services are aligned to ENL students grade levels, proficiency levels and instructional levels. We have 1 certified ESL teacher who collaborates with the literacy/humanities department and serves as their lead. She is able to meet the needs of ENLs as they acquire English throughout the year. Continuous review of data allows for flexibility with scheduling as students master different skills and become increasingly proficient in NYSESLAT modalities. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school does share a building with 2 other schools. Though we share physical space and collaborate throughout the year, including visitation, joint planning meetings with our respective tasks and other Learning Partner Program initiatives, we do not share resources for ENLS. We have our own MyOn online reading program, Lightsail online reading program, laptop computers, high interest/various leveled texts, Expeditionary Learning Curriculum, Workshop model, Smart Boards and document cameras in each room, iPads in each department, iReady program, Achieve 3000 reading program, etc. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are encouraged attend the MS 343 annual open house each August, 2017 with their families. During this comprehensive open house (all info delivered in English and Spanish with simultaneous interpretation), information is disseminated on our school-based clinic, extensive academic, sports and clubs after school programs, and weekend opportunities for students and families. All administrative and teaching staff attend these orientations as well as the Back to School dinner with parents in September, 2017, the MS 343 open houses and others. ENL and newcomer students are strongly encouraged to join the MS 343 after school program which facilitates numerous cultural and historical trips for the students on breaks, weekends and around the holidays such as museums, shows and plays. The after school component includes a rigorous academic component 2 days a week and an enrichment club program 2 days a week. Students are encouraged to choose their own club, including yearbook committee, dance, art, music, robotics/web design, online math games, creative writing, and media studies. Our PC, administration, Dean, math department, guidance counselor, ELA department, and others support the after school program by facilitating clubs and helping to supervise trips, snack time and game/club time. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? TBD based on enrollment for 2017-2018, budget announcements for 2017-2019 and resources not yet acquired for 2017-2018. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1  The ESL certified teacher and our ESL certified assistant principal meet twice a week to discuss ENL instructional strategies, ENL data and their implications on instruction and testing and ant additional programs, resources or materials that may be needed to fully support our ENLs. Our ESL teacher also attends out of school PD when applicable and is part of the team of teachers in the "Demonstration Teacher" program which provides talent coaching and feedback sessions to these lead teachers as part of this NYCDOE program. In addition, numerous PD sessions are facilitated for all teachers of ENLs, along with the ESL teacher. These topics include an introduction to the data review process for ENLs, looking at ENLs' strengths and areas of focus within the 4 modalities of the NYSESLAT, grouping ENLs both heterogeneously and homogeneously depending on the task, differentiating learning outcomes based on English language proficiency, reading non-fiction in the content areas, reading strategies for ENLs navigating content specific texts in content areas, the importance of interactive word walls in all subjects for ENLs, vocabulary acquisition and its importance for ENLs, and others. The dates of our PD sessions are: The full week on or around September 28 th -October 2 nd from 2:45-5:00 pm (will be based on the 2017-2018 NYCDOE school calendar) Chancellor's PD Day, November 3 rd 8:25am-2:45pm The full week on or around November 30th-December 4 th from 2:45-5:00 pm The full week on or around February 8 th -February 12 th from 2:45-5:00 pm The full week on or around May 31 st -June 3 rd from 2:45-5:00 pm and others as the year progresses. All pedagogical staff who instruct ENLs receive professional development in teaching writing. MS 343 has summer workshops, curriculum planning workshops, professional development workshops both in-house and outside of school to enhance teachers’ abilities to differentiate their instruction based on students’ NYSESLAT areas of strength and focus, as well as differentiate student outcomes. ENL teachers have also received professional support in technology, including the Smart Board to enhance ENLs’ visual learning experiences, using video and audio books to support ENLs listening skill, as well as in technology based programs that are available at MS 343, such as MyOn, Lightsail, Achieve 3000, iReady, etc. All teachers and support personnel receive the aforementioned spreadsheet of all ENLs strengths, primary and secondary areas of focus and bank of instructional strategies. The aforementioned topics are available to all teachers of ENLs throughout the school year as well (topics listed explicitly in #1). 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Numerous ELL parent workshops are held both after school/evening and Saturday hours are afforded to families of ELLs to help with high school application process. The bilingual PC and bilingual guidance counselor facilitate these meetings with parents and also provide translated information in various languages (should there be a case of a low-incidence language, the DOE's translation & Interpretation services would be accessed). Trips to visit high schools are coordinated by the school as well for our ENLs. Groups of students are chaperoned to visit schools, take specialized HS exams when applicable and are informed about the numerous parent opportunities the NYCDOE has to offer parents of ENLs, publicized in the monthly NYC and NYS online bulletins disseminated by the DOE sent to the ESL certified AP who disseminates the information to the school's PC and to parents and families. This information is disseminated through backpacked letters, our digital phone messenger, Twitter and the school's email services as well as via the monthly school calendar. Our bilingual guidance counselor also holds individual one-on-one meetings with each ENL to review the HS book and help with the application process. This is in addition to the class-wide information sessions that are facilitated by the ENLs' advisors during weekly advisory sessions. The same process applies to our college and university visits which ENLs and their parents are invited to attend. All pedagogical staff who instruct ENLs receive professional development in teaching writing facilitated by the ESL certified AP and/or other certified pedagogue. MS 343 also has summer workshops, curriculum planning workshops, professional development workshops both in-house and outside of school to enhance teachers’ abilities to differentiate their instruction 2  based on students’ NYSESLAT areas of strength and focus, as well as differentiate student outcomes. ENL teachers have also received professional support in technology, including the Smart Board to enhance ENLs’ visual learning experiences, using video and audio books to support ENLs listening skills (last year's second lowest performing modality), as well as in technology-based programs that are available at MS 343, such as MyOn, Lightsail, Achieve 3000, iReady, etc. All teachers and support personnel receive the aforementioned spreadsheet of all ELLs strengths, primary and secondary areas of focus and bank of instructional strategies on the 1st day back each September. These data banks are created from the most recent NYSESLAT data usually received over the summer. All meetings/PD sessions have agendas and sign-in sheets which are kept by the PA. Agendas are housed on Google Docs and are available for all staff to view and to use as resources. The aforementioned topics are available to all teachers of ENLs throughout the school year as well (topics listed explicitly in #1). Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Our bilingual PC coordinates and schedules these meetings with parents. She sends out formal invitations, utilizes the school's phone messenger system and send reminder notices with students. Parents meet with the ESL teacher, ESL certified AP and bilingual PC to discuss their student's progress in the 4 NYSESLAT modalities, progress meeting the goals they will set for themselves in September, 2017 with their ESL teacher, work habits, attendance issues if applicable, portfolio progress and modified tasks if applicable, etc. In the case of parents who speaks a low-incidence language, we first look to staff to see if there is someone available who is proficient in the language. If there is not a staff member available, there is often times another family member available who is bilingual, we also house an international school on our campus which has numerous faculty who speak low-incidence languages and can support. Interpretation services are also available through the NYCDOE's translation and interpretation unit and are sought when necessary. These parent meetings are monthly and meet sometimes in the mornings, after school or on Saturdays to accommodate parents' schedules based on a survey administered tp parents and families in late August/early September each year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Many of our ELLs' parents serve on the school's SLT, PTA and other school committees. They also volunteer to attend school functions such as quarterly dances, attend the PC's monthly workshops (also mentioned above in #1) and weekly exercise classes and go to the trips she coordinates to museums, Broadway shows, college and university tours, and other community events. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Classroom libraries consist of ENL, “Reluctant Readers”, and multi-cultural book sets. Additionally, ESL dictionaries are available in all classrooms. Word-to-word translation glossaries have been downloaded from the New York State ENL website for each content area subject and have been made available to students who speak languages other than English in all subject areas that the state provides them in. All classrooms and departments are supported with technology such as Smart boards, computers, document cameras, laptop carts, iPad carts and overhead projectors. Each ESL classroom also has NLA sets of books for ENLs. Online classroom libraries are available through the MyOn program. Additonal programs such as iReady and Achieve 3000 are also available to ENLs both from home and in school, including during the after school program. 3  4 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Vincent Gassetto, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 5  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: MS 343 School DBN: 07X343 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Vincent Gassetto Title Principal Deirdre Callahan Assistant Principal Angela Cunningham Parent Coordinator Althea Fuller ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Marisol Palau School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/28/17 6/28/17 TBD 6/28/17 TBD 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 TBD TBD TBD 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 6  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 07X343 School Name: MS 343/Academy of Applied Mathemati Superintendent: Mr. R. A The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Angela Cunningham PC yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Our school’s methodologies used to assess language preferences of our parent community were designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. SOme of the data used to ascertain the language needs of parents include examination of home language surveys (completed upon entry into a DOE school), additional survey conducted by the bilingual parent coordinator to assess what languages parents prefer to receive information in from the school, blue card information, ATS reports and others. These data are collected numerous times throughout the year and are kept with the Parent Coordinator and in our school's main office with the pupil accounting secretary. Our school community conducts an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of our parent outreach and policies we have put into place regarding parental involvement to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms is used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. 7  In developing the methodologies to assess language preferences, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted as was the parent coordinator who has her finger on the pulse of our parent and guardian community at MS 343. Our PC surveyed our members for additional input. An annual survey is administered to gather data on parent languages of choice and all of our documents, including our online Jupiter Grades system, automatic phone messenger system and mailings are programmed to disseminate information in the parent's language of choice. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish French Arabic 278 166 5 3 60.7 36.24 1.09 .66 274 169 5 3 59.83 36.9 1.09 .66 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Of the list of preferred languages represented, English and Spanish listed represent more than 10% of our school's population. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Orientation information August monthly calendars each month Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our bilingual staff (PC, counselor, Dean, office staff) translate all documents before sending home - our secretary utilizes parents' and families' preferred language to print out mailing addresses and sort envelopes by preferred language. Our bilingual PC translates this calendar in advance of the 1st of the month and distributes the document 8  8th grade graduation contract September Permission Slips Throughout the year Our bilingual 8th grade counselor Slips for test prep Saturdays, after school clubs and academics, trip and incentives, college awareness events, etc. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Every August our school hosts a back to school orientation for all new 6 th grade students and any incoming 7 th or 8 th graders and their families. Monthly Calendars Every August The 1st of each month interpretation service(s)? Both the parent coordinator and resident guidance counselor are fluent in Spanish, the language preferred by 36.24% of our school's population. They conduct sessions simultaneously interpreted in the auditorium. We have staff present who speak French and Soninke for those who wish to receive the information in those languages. Should a family request interpretation in another language, the office of translation and interpretation would be contacted to provide materials in those languages. 100% of information sent home to families, either in paper of digital form is done so in at least Spanish and English, with additional information and mailings sent to specific families in French and/or Arabic. All of our documents, including but not limited to: student program information, orientation information for parents, lunch information and emergency blue cards, (SEPTEMBER) all monthly calendars, parent workshop offerings, 9  MS 343 also hosts 4 parent-teacher nights throughout the course of the year (NYCDOE calendar) 1 per marking period (September, November, March, May) There are approximately 2 open houses in October Every October Every Fall in mid-September our school conducts "Meet and Greet" parent-staff back to school dinner held at MS 343. Every Fall in mid-September PTA and SLT meeting times and announcements (THROUGHOUT THE YEAR), Saturday and Writer's Workshop Bootcamp permission slips (WHEN APPLICABLE), teachers' letters home introducing their classes and rules, school supply lists (SEPT) and school holiday and closure information are all sent home in at least 2 languages. Additionally, our online Jupiter Grades system, automatic phone messenger system and automatic mailings are programmed to disseminate information in the parent's language of choice as well as in English. We also have staff members who speak French and Soninke for those families who wish to receive the information in those languages. Should a family request interpretation in another language, the office of translation and interpretation would be contacted to provide materials in those languages. We also offer an "Open Door Policy" which invites parents to visit classrooms and sit in on classes by appointment. Should a parent require an interpreter for a language other than Spanish or French (staff speak these languages), we would contact the DOE's language translation and interpretation unit at least 2 weeks ahead of time to ensure support for that family. These Open Houses that the school facilitates are for parents of prospective or registered students to attend as well as over a dozen organized parent workshops which include some facilitated by teachers and school-based staff on Saturdays throughout the year, with a heavy emphasis on Saturdays in February-April during "test prep" season. This dinner is open to all families and usually draws about 200 plus participants plus our own school staff for a sit down dinner. 0  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Our phone messenger disseminates information in English and Spanish. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Our beginning of the year staff manual includes CRs. In this case, the changes included were that minor students may not provide translation services • The Translation and Interpretation Unit will provide training to parent coordinators and other key school-based staff on language access requirements. We also conduct ENL workshops for teachers and staff to inform them about language requirements and sensitivity issues that may arise. We have several staff members who speak Spanish, two who speak French and access to 1 who speaks Soninke for those families who require interpretation assistance in those languages. Should a family request interpretation in another language, the office of translation and interpretation would be contacted to provide materials in those languages. We would also set up a training session with the office of translation and interpretation for staff should these needs arise with our families, or if a request by a family is made. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All parent information, such as a Parents' Bill of Rights, Parents' Guide to Language Access and ID Guide are provided in all languages disseminated by the NYCDOE. Our PC keeps all documents related to parents and her office is housed beside the SSA front desk in case of an an-demand situation that may arise. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our PC conducts surveys throughout the year to gauge parents' feedback and happiness with the school's programs and the way things are going school-wide. She gathers this information and shares it with administration which in turn makes instructional and programmatic decisions and turn keys the information to staff. Additionally, we have a very 1  active school leadership team and PTA which informs our school's administration of any suggestions or issues that may come up throughout the course of the year. 2 
