 10X344 School Name: AMPARK NEIGHBORHOOD Principal: KELLY LENNON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information AmPark Neighborhood School 10X344 School Number (DBN): 321000010344 PK - 5 3981 Hillman Avenue Bronx, NY 10463 718-548-3451 Phone Number: 718-581-2411 Fax: Kelly Lennon klennon@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Kelly Lennon Zoe Kleinmann OdalizNieves Casey Burns Dean Parker N/A Karen Armstrong District Information Geographical District: 10 Maribel Hulla Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 Superintendent’s Office Address: mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-581-2411 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: One Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Karen Armstrong CBO Representative, if applicable Erin Kerley Katie Pesature Kelley Delalla Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher  Kelly Lennon Casey Burns OdalizVasquez Tomas Yafar *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools)  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Javier Pacheco Marianne Cintron Crystal Teron-Salas Kerry Markin Jean Lane Audrey Routcliffee Inocencia Oliva Sofia Zuberbhuler Scott Davis Member/Teacher Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Teacher   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview   Mission Statement AmPark Neighborhood School's mission is to support and nurture our students as they experiment, reflect, make connections, and become active participants in their own learning. Together we instill a commitment to community. Our curricula reflect themes based on student interests, incorporate the arts, and align to the core standards our students must meet. AmPark embraces the spirit of inquiry; seeking information by questioning, engaging in self and peer assessment, and developing next steps in an effort to grow. Teachers and administrators grow professionally in a collaborative environment where best practices are learned and shared. Parents support our mission by engaging in their children's learning. AmPark Neighborhood School strives to create a diverse and inclusive community. All students, including ELLs and Students with Disabilities, are encouraged and supported in their educational endeavors to become complex thinkers and learners through presentation and support of high level and advanced reading, writing, speaking and listening. We believe that:  We believe in the development of the whole child—mind, body and spirit. o This belief supports our commitment to healthy nutrition and mindfulness practices.  Concern for community and respectful citizenship are a vital part of life in the classroom.  The best instructional strategies that reach a diverse population of learners including English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities are the best strategies to reach ALL students.  All children are capable of learning and achieving personal levels of success.  Children learn by doing, in an integrated, open atmosphere where subject boundaries are flexible.  Student learning is deepened and concretized by immersion in discourse and rich conversations on big ideas and engaging content.  Teachers, students and parents work collaboratively to develop the academic and social culture of our school.  Music, Art and Physical Education are important areas in the development of children.  The role of the school is to support the growth of the academic and social skills that will enable our children to take their places as literate, thoughtful and successful members of society 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. AmPark was founded in 2004 by representatives from the local community with the desire to have a progressive option for students in their neighborhood. The Amalgamated Housing Community and surrounding Van Cortlandt Village continue to play an influential role. Founding principles included a focus on community-mindedness, wellness, strong social and emotional practices, and integrated learning opportunities within authentic contexts. Full-time music, arts, and physical education instruction have been prioritized. Inclusive education and the celebration of diversity have also remained core values since the schools inception. At AmPark, we believe that students are most successful when engaged in authentic tasks with audience and purpose. The majority of instruction follows a gradual release of responsibility model from the teacher to the students. This begins with explicit modeling and demonstration, scaffolded small group instruction, and extended opportunities for independent practice. We believe that utilizing this model will result in authentic transfer where students apply taught skills and strategies to any context with independence. Direct instruction is balanced with opportunities for inquiry, exploration, and investigation over the course of units and studies. We continuously strive towards increasing access for all learners for a fully inclusive model where needs are primarily met within the context of the classroom. Nurturing and supportive environments where students feel known and cared for as individuals by the adults around them is also paramount to student success. Social emotional learning is at the heart of our work, and includes skill such as self-regulation, responsible decision-making, and community ties. 0  Common practices that best illustrate our beliefs include:  Curricula Design o A balance of workshop model lessons with inquiry lessons, task based lessons, collaborative group work sessions, and frequent student to student discussion o Use of a balanced literacy framework that incorporates read-aloud, shared or close reading, guided reading and writing, word work, and interactive writing o Longitudinal studies and investigations, such as the 2nd grade bird study or a 5th grade classroom trout study o The use of essential questions when unit planning, as well as daily learning targets in student friendly language (Today I will… so that I can…) o The incorporation of universal design for learning principles in unit planning, as well as integration of social and emotional links o Routine and targeted cycles of small group instruction for Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions leading to increased student proficiency from pre- to post- assessments. This has also resulted in student ownership of goals and next steps, and the ability to grow independently as a learner. The resources of other staff members including speech teachers, paraprofessionals, and instructional coaches are also leveraged for intervention. o Systems for sharing planning documents to allow special education, ENL, and related service providers access to class goals o Student toolkits that mimic teaching tools and can be used to scaffold or extend instruction providing students with access points to grade level curriculum o Full integration of Fundations for the first time this school year in response to phonemic awareness data from K-2 teachers providing students with additional delivery models of instruction o A commitment to arts and wellness instruction, with a full-time visual arts, music and movement, and P.E. teacher on staff  Assessment o The use of common assessment tools and time within and across grade levels to examine and norm common expectations across learning progressions o The use of actionable feedback that includes what students need to do and how they need to do it o Varied use of both formative and summative assessment tools, such as mid-workshop check-ins, exit tickets, performance tasks, running records, observations and conferences, writing portfolios, end of module assessments, pre- and post- writing unit assessments, self- and peer checklists, and the addition of the math performance series which has led to a broader picture of student progress and informed learning targets for small group cycles of intervention  Social and Emotional Learning o Class and community opportunities for student leadership, such as a student council, which has expanded student voice and shared decision-making o Community based discussions, such as 3rd floor community talks, restorative circles, staff circles o Explicit teaching of prosocial behaviors, such as how to work collaboratively and how to resolve conflicts o Celebration of student community contributions and relationship based rewards  Professional Learning: o Staff inquiry in select content areas (math, writing, social and emotional learning, small group reading instruction) which has led to the creation of team action plans to address identified problems of practice o Varied PL methods such as cycles of topics, inter-visitations, mentorship, learning walks, modeling, and lesson study which has enabled differentiation for staff members of varying proficiency and/or experience levels 1  o The creation of our own Gathering Protocol that includes time to connect as a community, reflect on the work that has been done, and project the next steps School Characteristics: For the 2018-2019 school year, there will be two sections on each grade level from Pre-Kindergarten through Fifth Grade, along with one Third and Fourth Grade 12:1:1 bridge class. One of each section in grades K-4 will be an Integrated Collaborative Teaching classroom. Our English as a New Language teacher also fulfills a part-time Science Cluster position that services students in grades 2 and 3. Our Instructional Coach also provides Academic Intervention Services to small groups of students. New this year, we will have a Student in Temporary Housing Coordinator as an F-Status position. This individual will provide academic and enrichment services to our STH population. Two of our Highly Effective teachers will serve as Model Teachers for the first time in the 2018-2019 school year, providing professional learning support to their colleagues. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Student Populations: AmPark has a relatively small ELL and Special Education population as compared to other schools across our district, at 4% and 18% respectively. We continue to work to ensure that services are provided within the general education setting as much as possible in order to maximize access to the least restrictive environment. ENL population: Entering: 7% Expanding: 41% Transitioning: 7% Commanding: 45% Special education population: ICT: 51% Self-Contained: 23% SETSS: 12% Related Services Only: 14% 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 2  According to the Learning Environment Survey results, our Strong Family and Community Ties data increased from 3.75 to 4.35 from last year to this year. Over the course of the year, we embedded additional opportunities into the school calendar for workshops, community events, and time to visit or volunteer in classrooms. We have also utilized electronic platforms in every classroom to provide direct pathways for teachers to share classroom happenings and to communicate routinely. Our newsletter has also expanded to include greater variety in the topics covered and has gone to weekly electronic distribution. According to internal Social and Emotional Learning data, 85% of students indicate that one or more adults notice when they feel sad or unhappy and 93% of students indicated that one or more adults recognize when they are doing a good job and encourage them to keep working. Regarding Effective School Leadership, by the end of the school year the average Danielson rating in Designing Coherent Instruction was a 3.6 and the average for Demonstrating Knowledge of Content and Pedagogy was a 3.7. Our instructional focus for the year was relating to core curriculum planning and planning for cycles of small group intervention. The success of these initiatives can be attributed to moving one of our Highly Effective teachers into a full-time instructional coaching position, building time into the master schedule for mentors to meet with new teachers, school-wide adoption of Universal Design for Learning unit planning, sending teams of teachers on school visits and to national conferences, collaborating with two math consultants (K-2 and 3-5), and cycles of observation and professional learning. Another element of celebration is Supportive Environment. This year we added The Leader in Me as a school wide initiative. We continue to use Positive Intervention Behavior Supports and The RULER Approach while layering on this additional support. The Leader in Me provided students with opportunities to take on leadership roles across the school, run assemblies that teach The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, and build CASEL aligned social skills. Our Learning Environment Survey rating was 3.54. A key area of focus for this school year will be on the Rigorous Instruction element. While moving students at an appropriate pace has impact, in order to effectively close the achievement gap we need to ensure that students are moved at an accelerated pace. Therefore, Rigorous Instruction will be the element that we focus on as a school-wide community. We have made strong gains in this area in 2017-2018 moving from 39% proficiency on the ELA state exams to 51% proficiency. Additionally, we decreased students performing at a Level 1 by 7% from 23% to 16%. Students with disabilities performing at proficiency increased from 6% to 25% and ENL students overall remained at 25% proficiency. 3rd and 4th grade continue to lead in proficiency at 56% and 54%, while 5th grade performed at 45%. This marked a 21% increase in fifth grade over one year. In math, student proficiency increased by 3% from 46% to 49%. Grades 3, 4, and 5 performed at 58%, 55%, and 36% marking progress in 4th and 5th grade and a decline in 3rd grade from 2016-2017. 2018-2019 Instructional Focus: If teachers assess student learning using multiple measures and use the results to design authentic instructional experiences, then student engagement will increase and all children will make noticeable achievement gains. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X344 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 395 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 22 22 15 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 29 15 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 53.0% % Attendance Rate 46.6% % Reduced Lunch 2.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 63.3% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 16.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.1 0% 13% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 51.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 94% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO YES N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO YES N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 94.3% 6.6% 19.5% 13.7% 3.8% 2.8% 2 0% 7.9 48.6% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to state test score results, AmPark consistently outperforms the city average and the district average on the New York State tests. June 2018 state test cut scores indicate: -87% met in math -90% met in ELA 2017 State Test Scores indicated: -39% ELA proficiency -46% Math proficiency 2018 State Test Scores indicated: -51% ELA proficiency -49% Math proficiency 2017 ELA Comparison: Grade 3: AmPark: 57%, District: 28%. Grade 4: AmPark: 41%, District: 30% Grade 5: AmPark: 24%, District: 24% 5  2017 Math Comparison: Grade 3: AmPark: 65%, District: 29% Grade 4: AmPark: 51%, District: 26% Grade 5: AmPark: AmPark 35%, District 25% 2018 Comparison data is not yet available for state exams. Additionally, AmPark outperforms the city average and the district average on the Learning Environment Survey in this element of the framework across most measures. Positive Responses: -School Commitment: 100% (Outperforms District by 18%, City by 17%) -Common Core Literacy Shifts: 97% (+2%, +4%) -Common Core Math Shifts: 94% (+0%, +1%) -Course Clarity: 72% (+2%, +0%) 2. The priority need to be addressed in this goal is student progress. According to the Learning Environment survey the rating for this category decreased from 4.29 to 3.83. Additionally, the state reports that in the 2017-2018 school year AmPark shifted from "high-performing, low-impact" to "low-performing, low-impact." The Gates-McGintie test that 2nd grades take indicates that, on average, our second graders make one month of progress each month. The Teachers College Assessment Pro system also indicated that approximately 50% of our students leave each grade performing at the same proficiency level they entered in. We have also found from Advance ratings that the largest area of instructional need is around 3b: Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By May 2019, teachers will utilize integrated units of study and multiple measures of authentic assessment in instruction resulting in a 5% increase on the NYS ELA exams. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Activity 1: Planning Time Time will be provided to an integrated planning committee to design four studies per grade level with science and social studies integrated with literacy for the 2018-19 school year. Throughout the year, time will be provided both during the school day and outside of the school day to unpack and plan the units with the coach and/or mentor teachers. Teachers will plan writing units of study and lessons collaboratively, with a focus on multiple entry points for students, including small group instruction, variations of final product and presentation, choice of writing materials, etc. The master schedule was revised to provide teachers with common planning time bi-weekly for the first time. Each grade level was provided with 8 hours of summer per-session for initial planning. Additionally, a 6-week Professional Learning Cycle has been scheduled for the fall to provide teachers with planning time. Activity 2: Data Examination -The data specialist will develop additional systems for measuring students progress, grouping students, and making comparisons. -Data Meetings with take place with each classroom teacher three times over the course of the school year in alignment with report cards to assess student progress. -The fourth and fifth grade Professional Learning Community will use the Data Wise cycle of inquiry to examine assessment results and adjust instruction accordingly. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 06/2018-5/2019 Mentor Teachers All students Instructional Coach ELL/SWD/ high-need students Administration All students ENL/SWD/high-need students 07/2018: Systems 11/18, 3/19, 6/19 Data Days Data Specialist Instructional Coach ULit Coach Mentor Teachers Classroom teachers and support staff PLCs 10/18 - 6/18 Administration Activity 3: Professional Learning All students 9/18-6/19 K-5 teachers Administration 7 Model Teachers Instructional Coach ULit Coach Paraprofessionals -Classroom teachers will participate in a professional learning cycle with a focus on integrated instruction, questioning and discussion, and project-based learning ENL/1st grade/2nd grade/SWD -Selected teachers will attend Showcase School Visits -Classroom teachers will participate in inter-visitations -Math consultants and Instructional Coach will provide professional learning to teachers through study groups and inter-visitations on number talks and task-based instruction in math -ULit Coach and Reading Rescue Coordinator will provide professional learning and meet to review data with Reading Rescue tutors -ULit Coach will focus on early literacy development with Kindergarten teachers -Assistant Principal will partner with ENL teacher, cluster teachers, and teachers providing AIS to utilize Advanced Literacy strategies -2nd grade teachers will focus on inferential comprehension during planning with coach -Generation Ready Coach will support teachers over four days with lesson design and delivery. Activity 4: Community Involvement All students 9/18 - 6/19 Administration All teachers School Leadership Team AmPark will partner with local organizations to increase opportunities for authentic application of learning. Schoolwide: Friends of Van Cortlandt Park -K/1 Salvadori Center: Community Study, Amalgamated Housing Community, New York Public Library -2: Friends of Van Cortlandt Park for Park Study, The Audubon Society for Bird Study, New Victory Theater -3: Museum of the City of New York -4: New York Historical Society -5: New York Historical Society 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Overview of curriculum and partnerships will be provided at Back to School Night by teachers. School Leadership Team will be consulted with to examine state test score data and to discuss curricular adjustments, as well as the partnerships. Members of the Amalgamated Housing Community will be met with throughout the year to ensure a shared vision for the school. Teachers will present at Parent Association Meetings approximately three times over the course of the year on topics such as math support, literacy support, and social and emotional learning. The parent coordinator will provide a homework help and NYS test overview session during Tuesday Family Engagement Time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Literacy Coach and Universal Literacy Coach Model Teachers Generation Ready Consultant Addition of AIS support teacher Continuation of two partial Science cluster teachers PL sessions for planning integrated instruction Scheduling for common preps Cycles of Professional Learning time on Mondays Multi-level libraries in lending library book room Surveying parents to find resources for in-school programs Substitutes/coverage to support lab-site/learning opportunities Supplemental materials (trade book sets across topic, author, etc.; software) Per session activities for study groups to revisit tasks and unit planning; Grant-writing team Scheduling and Master Calendar Google Docs 9  Rolling Agendas and Minutes Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. At the end of each writing unit (approximately every 6-8 weeks) summative rubrics will be used to assess on-demand progress. Performance series assessments in reading and math will be given 3 times over the course of the year to students in grades 3-5 and the results will be analyzed by the PLCs. Running Records will be given formally 3 times over the course of the school year and results will be analyzed with model teachers and ULit Coach to adjust instruction. Data Days will be utilized to assess effectiveness of core instruction and small group work. In February, all 3-5 students will take a Mock ELA and Math exam to gauge progress. Qualitative data will be gathered from end of study presentations. Our mid-point benchmark is 54% ELA proficiency by February 2019 as demonstrated by summative rubrics, performance series assessments, and running records. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Performance Series 3-5 Running Records K-2 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. School's strengths: Year end Advance ratings indicate an average rating of 3.7 in Respect and Rapport and 3.2 in Managing Student Behavior. Our rating in this element on the Learning Environment Survey was a 3.54 for this school year. Involvement of all key stakeholders in roll-out of The Leader in Me as indicated by rolling agendas and minutes, calendar of events, and the internal social and emotional learning survey. The staff also participated in another day of professional learning from Stephen Covey and the lighthouse team attended three coaching days. On two occasions, teams of principals visited the school to learn more about SEL work at AmPark. Our PBIS PART initiative is school-wide. AmPark's high-level OORS incidents decreased during the 2017-2018 school year. We have continued to deepen our RULER approach to social/emotional learning program (RULER = Recognize, Understand, Label, Express, Regulate) in every class in the school and sent a new team of teachers to be trained in the approach as a refresher. 2. The priority need to is to develop coherent systems for better supporting individual and groups of students with specific social and emotional learning needs. According to the Learning Environment Survey, only 66% of responses were positive which was lower than both the district and the city average. Additionally, we find in our OORS report data that the same individual students account for the majority of the higher level incidents in the school showing us that they are in need of additional tiers of support. ` Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a tiered response to intervention system will be utilized to effectively provide intervention to students demonstrating Tier 2 and Tier 3 needs, as evidenced by decreasing Level 3 and 4 infractions by 5% as evidenced by the OORS index report. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity 1: Development of System by Pupil Personnel Team Tier 2 and 3 students July and August 2018 Social Worker -Create "on-call" schedule that outlines who is responsible for responding to student support needs -Create system for how adults respond, transition students, and organize follow-up and follow-through such as restorative approaches, apologies-in-action, etc. -Outline Tier 1, 2, and 3 interventions -Publicize document Activity 2: Continue to utilize the Pupil Personnel Team to coordinate student support needs. All students 09/2018-06/2019 Administration Guidance Counselor Parent Coordinator General Education Teacher Classroom Teacher Social Worker Guidance Counselor Administration Parent Coordinator -Build capacity to provide distributive leadership opportunities amongst team members -Ensure follow through on interventions Activity 3: Establish Peer Mediation Team -PPT members and students from Grades 4 and 5 will develop Peer Mediation Team, then review applications and select new -ELL/SWD/ high-need students 4th and 5th grade representatives 11/2018 - 6/2019 Pupil Personnel Team 2 participants. Mid-year and June survey will be used to track improvement and create revisions. All students -Peer Mediation Team will create a schedule for students to meet and resolve conflict. Activity 4: Continue to infuse SEL work into instruction -Provide Lighthouse Team with time to meet monthly -Utilize Culturally Relevant Pedagogy strategies to support diverse perspectives All students, students identified to be "at-risk" 11/2018-6/2019 Pupil Personnel Team Administration Leadership Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Sharing of RULER, TLiM, and PART materials and strategies with family members at PA meetings, SLT meetings, and through an evening workshop. Electronic communication via the school newsletter. Pupil Personnel Team will share information with families on the RTI process, as well as the peer mediation team. Key personnel: AP, Guidance Counselor, Social Worker, Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for PART training/ Leader In Me program; scheduling of sessions for PD on common preps and Monday PL sessions; RULER materials for every classroom; TCIS training and per-diem for coverage; social-emotional library resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, Level 2 and 3 OORS infractions will be reduced by 3% when compared with the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3  OORS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. 2018 Learning Environment Survey shows overall rating of 4.27. -School Commitment: 100% positive (+18%, +17%) -Peer Collaboration: 96% (+6%, +5%) -Cultural Awareness: 98% (+$%, +4%) -Innovation and Collective Responsibility: 92% (+10%, +9%) Additionally, it is evident through agendas and meeting minutes that teachers meet routinely across a variety of groups including grade level planning teams, action teams, inquiry teams, and on special committees such as SIT and PPT. Teacher plans come to fruition as evidenced by events in the classroom and the community. In Advance, the highest average indicator was 4e: Growing and Developing Professionally at 3.8. 2. 2018 Learning Environment Survey Results indicated that the Quality of Professional Development measure had 81%positive which was above the district by 2% and the city by 1%. 70% of teachers reported having the opportunity to work productively with teachers from other schools on professional development and 79% of teachers said that their professional development experiences included enough time to think carefully about, try, and evaluate new ideas. This shows that the teachers would benefit from additional time to collaborate with one another and to remain on topics for longer periods of time. During SLT meetings, the teachers requested additional time to participate in inter-vistitations within the building and also to attend opportunities outside of the building. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, classroom teachers will participate in professional learning around Using Questioning and Discussion techniques, including inter-visitation, labsites, professional texts, and rubric analysis, resulting in 90% effective ratings for indicator 3d. 5  6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Activity 1: Professional Learning - Leadership Team will plan a 6-week cycle of professional learning to take place during Monday PL time -Model Teachers and Instructional Coach will incorporate professional learning around 3b into their cycles of support -Model Teachers will host labsite lessons for other teachers to visit -Indicator 3b will be unpacked with the staff Activity 2: Scheduling -Leadership Team will develop calendar of professional learning and master schedule to allow for inter-visitation -Coverage will be provided as needed to allow time as needed Activity 3: Leverage Model Teachers and Instructional Coach -Host and facilitate labsites across the school to share strategies and best practices -Share research based strategies with staff members -Engage in protocol driven data analysis to drive instruction Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Advance eligible teachers 09/2018 - 06/2019 Administration, Instructional Team All staff Summer 2018 and on-going Administration Teaching staff 10/2018-05/2019 Model Teachers Instructional Coach Administration Trust-building: All students 9/18 – 6/19 Principal, - By building teams and providing grade-wide and cross-grade professional learning opportunities, teachers will be able to identify and express their learning needs in a safe environment. Coach, Model Teachers 7 - Administrators participate in meetings and lab sites, contributing to a common language and purpose for the whole community. - During SLT and PA meetings, parents will be provided the opportunity to engage in discussion. -Turn-key district text on Culturally Responsive Pedagogy to staff members to support reaching every child. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Evening literacy workshop Sharing out at PA and SLT meetings Electronic shout-outs through the Remind App Electronic communication through school website and monthly newsletter Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Master Schedule Per-session, period coverage, and per-diem for coverages Funding for Model Teacher roles Texts for book studies School website Professional Learning Calendar Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 8  Mid-year Advance analysis of movement in 3b: Questioning and Discussion Techniques Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Principal and Assistant Principal collaborated to norm observation practices and guide the creation of feedback for teachers, resulting in 100% of teachers ratings at Effective or Highly Effective for 2018. 2. Based on 2017-2018 Advance data, the Danielson instructional focus areas of using questioning and discussion techniques will be deepened. The average rating was 2.8 which was our lowest performing domain. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Principal and AP will observe teachers in cycles of observations that target individual goals resulting in a minimum of 100% of summative evaluation ratings at the level of Effective or Highly Effective by June 2019. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity 1: Norming All students 9/18 – 6/19 Principal, -Principal and Assistant Principal will conduct initial observations together to continue to check in on norming practice. Teachers in Advance -Principal and Assistant Principal will continue to meet with Advance Coach to ensure observations are normed with district expectations. -Administration will check in on feedback to teachers during weekly cabinet meetings. Assistant Principal, Advance Coach Activity 2: Strategic Support -Admin will collaborate with ULit Coach, Instructional Coach, and Model Teachers to plan supports for individuals and groups of teachers -Leadership team will develop cycles of professional development based on teacher need -Administrative team will develop cycles of observation to support teachers in identified areas of need through feedback and coaching -Leadership Team will coordinate with outside consultants, such as the Lehman Math Project, to provide supports All Advance Eligible Teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal, Advance Coach, Coach, Teachers, Instructional Team Trust-building: 9/18-6/19 Principal, 1 Teachers in Advance Assistant Principal, Advance Coach, Instructional Team - Providing actionable feedback to teachers in a timely manner allows teachers to refine practice in a risk-free, supportive environment. - Danielson’s Framework for Teaching provides a common language for all staff, including administrators. As a result, teachers can participate in meaningful exchanges with administrators and colleagues around best practices and next steps. - Parents of SLT will participate in discussions about growth of Teacher practice, and goals set. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. PC will conduct workshops alongside and/or teaching staff, providing parents with an overview of the Danielson Framework. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Advance Coach for norming practices; PL time with teachers for feedback and planning; Coaching plans to address identified needs based on Advance data; Scheduling of common preps; Per session hours (40) set aside for 4 - 5 teachers across the year for planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Advance teacher data: Mid-year, Principal and AP will analyze Advance data to assess if a minimum of 80% of teachers are at Effective or Highly Effective in focus areas. 2  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data for Teachers; Student data (based on PL around feedback/ questioning / discussion / assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. AmPark outperformed the city and the district in every indicator related to this element. The school calendar has numerous class, grade, and community wide events that are well attended by families. Examples include: -Monthly Community Sings -Annual Spring Concert and Arts Festival -Annual Career Day -Class Publishing Celebrations -Holiday Breakfasts/Feasts -Annual Festival of Lights -Meet and Greets, Back to School Night, Open School Night, Parent Teacher Conferences -Annual Science Fair -Great American Spell Check, Geography Bee -WonderWalk 2. Parent Association meetings and after-school workshops presented by teachers and/or the parent coordinator are not well attended. In order to effectively share information with families and ensure a strong home-school connection, increasing attendance and participation is important. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 10% of families will attend at least 60% Parent Association meetings, teacher led workshops, and evening community events. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Activity 1: Parent Survey Parents 9/18-6/19 Parent Coordinator -The Parent Coordinator will survey all families to determine areas of interest in supporting students academically and socially and emotionally, as well as what times would work best -The Leadership Team will utilize the results of the survey to plan evening workshops that address the top four areas of need School Leadership Team Administration Activity 2: Workshops Parents Principal, -A minimum of four evening workshops will be planned to address identified areas of need and will align with regularly scheduled PA meetings, including the morning re-cap when possible. Workshops can be run by outside agencies, teachers, or guest speakers. -Parent Coordinator will plan monthly workshops and discussions during Family Engagement time -Attendance will be taken and archived 9/18 - 6/19 Classroom and support teachers, Parents, PA, Parent Coordinator, CBO members Activity 3: Communication with families Parents 9/18 – 6/19 Principal, -AmPark Family Handbook -SLT Meetings -DOE calendar events -Monthly School Blog -Parent Coordinator -Ladder of Communication -Teacher messaging and web apps Classroom and support teachers, Parents, PA, Parent Coordinator, CBO members 5  Trust-building: Parents 9/18 – 6/19 Principal, - Providing workshops that give families information on the academic and social/emotional expectations for students provides a common language and an opportunity for parents to engage in community events related to student learning and behavior. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Classroom and support teachers, Parents, PA, Parent Coordinator, CBO members If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Amalgamated Community (NORC, etc.); Van Cortlandt Park Conservancy, Bronx Botanical Gardens, The Audubon Society, The Museum of the History of New York, Sarah Lawrence College, Lehman College, The New York Historical Society, Salvadori, Advocates for Children, Remind, Class Dojo Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. X Non-contractual Services – Parent Involvement Per session for teachers to lead workshops; resources for materials to support workshops; additional texts added to parent lending library to support areas of focus Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In 2017-18 the total number of attendance at evening PA meetings across the school year was 158 parents. By February of 2019, evening workshop attendance will be at a minimum of 200 parents cumulatively. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets 6  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) K-2: Level 1 according to TC data including sight words, Letter/Sound Identification, and running records Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Kindergarten: small group instruction using Fundations, guided reading, and/or strategy groups, read aloud Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One-to-one, small group During the school day and before-school, iReadyat home 3-5: Did not meet cut score on ELAstate test, approaching proficiency on ELA state test, far below on Performance Series Mathematics K-2: Baseline and Midlinedata 3-5: Did not meet cut scores on state test, approaching proficiency on state test, far below on Performance Series 1st Grade: Reading Rescue, Fundations, read aloud 2nd: Fundations, close reading, repeated reading, interactive writing, guided reading, book clubs 3rd- 5th grade: Small group AISincluding close reading, guided reading, Wilson 4th and 5th: Test preparation sessions using close reading strategies iReady, fluency work, story problems, use of manipulatives, models, graphic organizers, concept maps One-to-oneand small group During the school day and before school, iReadyat home 8  Science Unit rubrics Social Studies Unit rubrics At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Pupil Personnel Team referral, teacher identification, parent request, 504 plan, OORs data Small group During the school day Small group During the school day Check-in/Check-out system, small group, one-to-one, clubs During the school day, during breakfast, after-school Experiential learning, personalized high frequency word walls and vocabulary lists, concept maps, graphic organizers Experiential learning, content review, investigations, personalized high frequency word walls and vocabulary lists, graphic organizers, concept maps Peer Mediation, social skills groups, restorative justice practices, I-statements, journaling, meta-moment, mood meter check-ins, behavior reflections, daily check-ins, behavior plans, social stories 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Students in Temporary Housing: 34 students total as of 6/18 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  Students will receive AIS instructional support from an F-status teacher across the year. Trip fees and program dues will also be paid for through these funds. In addition, materials to support the population (books, supplies, clothing, etc.) will be purchased. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. $28,187 for F-Status support $1,000 for materials and fees 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: -Partnerships with Lehman College and Manhattan College that include hiring of former student teachers -Hiring Committee that begins with a panel interview, individual interview, and demo lesson Retention: -Use of preference sheets to honor teacher choices -High trust environment as evidenced by Learning Environment Survey -Departmentalized programs in grades 4 and 5 -Teacher voice reflected in decision making -Historically high retention rate Assignments: -Teacher leadership roles such as coordinators, model teachers, data specialist, mentors -Upper grade teachers are able to work in departmental programs Professional Development: -Job embedded support such as inter-visitation, study groups, inquiry teams, labsites, book studies -Attendance at conferences 2  -Visits to showcase schools -Per-session opportunities for planning with colleagues 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). - Teachers: The Leader in Me Conferences, PD days, Coaching Days, BFSC offerings, The RULER Approach Institute, National Conference for Teaching Mathematics, Eureka PD, Lehman College Math Consultant - Paraprofessionals: attend a series of Reading Rescue day-long training sessions at Teachers College, as well as The Leader in Me PD days, TCIS, and BFSC offerings on Chancellor's Conference Days. - Administration: Mentoring, Principals Symposiums, Assistant Principal Meetings, Coaching Days with The Leader in Me, ACSD conference -Guidance: BFSC opportunities, FBA/BIP support, STH and Respect for All days Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). AmPark holds tours for families of incoming PK and K students, in order to build trust with new students and their family members. In June, all new PK K students were invited to AmPark to take part in a social/center time in their new classrooms, and students took part in one-on-one informal assessments. There is an Open House event the day before school begins to visit the new classroom. 3  Teachers College and EngageNY units of study support transition from Pre-K to K 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams review and provide feedback about AmPark's informal and formal assessments in PL sessions, and at Cabinet meetings including running records, unit assessments, checklists, rubrics/progressions. Assessments are revised based on teacher feedback, and PL is provided by consultants and coaches. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal $29, 187 X STH Title II, Part A Federal Title III, Part A Federal $28,081 X Title III, Immigrant Federal $ 2,471.00 X TRANSLATION Column B Section Reference(s) Section 7AISF-Status Teacher Section 1, Section 4, Section 5 Per-session for teacher planning, leading parent workshops Translation for workshops, IEPs, and conferences Per-session for translating 4  Tax Levy (FSF) Local $2,250,694 X Section 4, Section 5 Per-diemfor professional learning coverage, per-session for planning and professional learning, model teachers salary and coaching salary 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 5   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. AmPark, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. AmPark will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students -providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; -providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; -fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; -providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; -sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  -providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: -actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; -engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; -ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; -support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; -maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; -conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; -provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; -host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); 8  -schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; -translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; -conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement -holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; -hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; -encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; -supporting or hosting Family Day events; -establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; -encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; -providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; -developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; -providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between/teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) AmPark, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: -using academic learning time efficiently; -respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; -implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; 9  -offering high quality instruction in all content areas; -providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: -conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; -convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; -arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; -respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; -providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; -involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; -providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; -ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year. Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff -ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; -notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; -arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; -planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 0  -creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; -assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); -sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; -supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; -ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; -advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; -monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities -ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; -check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; -read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); -set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; -promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; -encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; -volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; -participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; -communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; -respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; -become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; -participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 1  -take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; -share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities -attend school regularly and arrive on time; -complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; -follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; -show respect for myself, other people and property; -try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; -always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Ampark Neighborhood School Borough Bronx School Number 344 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kelly Lennon Coach Priya Cassidy ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Andrea Dudzinski Teacher/Subject Area Sheri Rottenburg/Speech Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Javier Pacheco Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Bonnie Durgin Coach School Counselor Parent Parent Coordinator Angie Lebron Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 394 Total number of ELLs 21 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.33% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? AmPark Neighborhood School uses TCRWP to assess our students' early literacy skills. These assessments include running records (with miscue analysis, and assessment of comprehension, fluency and accuracy to determine Fountas and Pinnell reading levels), sight words, letter recognition and sounds, spelling inventories, and writing baselines. Based on the results of the data we make informed decisions on what modalities to focus on while supporting our ELLs. Writing baselines offer insights into grammatical and structure strengths and next steps, as well as use of language. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 4  Running records are conducted by classroom teachers at the beginning, middle, and end of the school year. Writing baselines are administered at the beginning and end of each unit. Math baselines and endlines are administered at the beginning and end of each school year and midline and endline exams are administered during each unit. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Annually we assess the effectiveness of the program we have for ELLs by examining the NYSESLAT, the state ELA and Math scores, and our curriculum based base line and end line assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Ampark has AIS, small groups, Reading Rescue, a part-time literacy coach, a part-time math coach, ICT classes, and SETTS. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school uses the RTI framework starting with the administration of the Home Language Survey completed with the ENL teacher at registration. With this information the ENL teacher is immediately able to uncover factors that may influence the student's English language learning process, thereby allowing this information to guide instructional choices. When school begins, children are given a baseline literacy skill assessment (TCRWP) to see if the student is meeting grade level benchmarks. This is compared to the NYSESLAT that ELL students take in the Spring of the previous school year to measure language proficiency. If the student is flagged as at-risk or below benchmark on any particular skill or competency, he/she receives this targeted support by the ENL teacher in coordination with their classroom teacher. AmPark provides strong core (tier1) instruction both in the general education and ENL classroom. Students and teachers jointly construct knowledge working in small groups and individually to foster communication skills and teamwork. Students are participating in rigorous academics and receiving targeted instruction at all times. We also have a strong art and music program that allow all students to know the world through musical thinking and spatial representation which, according to Howard Gardner, are part of our seven distinct intelligences. The ENL teacher, Ilesa Borges Carvalho uses the students' strengths to influence the curriculum choices to best reach each child in their language development. This Tier II instruction is used with each student needing extra attention or a "double dose" of instruction in the areas of need identified. Where needed, some students move on to Tier III instruction for intensive and individualized instruction in a small group or 1:1. The RTI team reviews benchmark assessments of all students and identifies students who are not meeting their benchmarks. Program recommendations are made as a team based on the assessment results and other influencing factors. Those students are then recommended for blended programs such as i-Ready, Big Brainz, Imagine Learning, as well as teacher directed programs, such as Reading Rescue or AIS. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The patterns in the student's results in the four modalities across proficiency levels indicate that our students have a higher listening/speaking ability than reading and writing. Every classroom at AmPark is language and print rich. Children are encouraged to listen and speak as active participants in full class meeting times. Children conference with teachers weekly around their written work and are supported in writing in a number of genres in all curricular areas. Instruction targeting phonemic skills is embedded in the work of the classroom, which supports children's understanding and development as readers and writers. Word work and studies in diverse subject areas build vocabulary and develop language acquisition skills. During pull-out sessions, students expand upon classroom studies using scaffolded, content based lessons that explicitly address vocabulary and embedded grammar. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Common planning time, shared preps, part-time literacy and math coaches, 6 week PD cycles. Part IV: ELL Programming 5  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our Freestanding ENL program is a combination pull-out, push-in program. Ilesa Borges Carvalho, who is dual licensed in ENL and Common Branches, works collaboratively with the classroom teachers providing a combination of content based and language instruction inside the classroom and in small groups outside of the classroom. She uses many ENL techniques and focuses on teaching language through content. Our school follows the balanced literacy model and this is supported by a part-time coach. This program offers students a variety of learning experiences in literacy through different contexts, such as : read-alouds, shared/modeled writing, word work, shared reading, guided reading, literacy centers and independent reading and writing. Students are actively engaged in studio art, music, science and drama. Our school also uses the Engage NY math program and has a part-time math coach to support student learning. b. TBE program. If applicable. We currently do not offer a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. We currently do not offer a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our 15 mandated ENL students are served by our licensed, ENL teacher, Ilesa Borges Carvalho. As per CR Part 154, Mrs. Carvalho meets with her 2 entering/emerging student for 360 minutes per week; 180 minutes of stand alone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL. The 6 transitioning students receive 180 minutes per week; 90 minutes of stand alone ENL and 90 minutes of integrated ENL. The 7 expanding students receive 180 minutes of integrated ENL per week and the 7 former ELLs receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Using the RTI Framework, our Freestanding ENL program uses a Tier II small group focus, closely following the Common Core Learning Standards for ENL and collaborating with classroom teachers to keep out-of-classroom content aligned with in-classroom content studies. For instance in the second grade unit study of birds, the ENL teacher aligns her curriculum to incorporate the related vocabulary and grammar studies embedded in the content being studied by the second grade students. Our Integrated ENL program works as a collaboration between the classroom teacher and the ENL teacher who meet regularly to go over content and integrated language strategies targeted for the ELL population. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We evaluate our ELLs in English development using TCRWP through out the year, as we do not have a dual-language or transitional bilingual program at this time. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. Long Term 6  e. Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status AmPark's ENL integrated and stand alone program seeks to best accommodate the needs of each student in the program. Ilesa Borges Carvalho, the ENL teacher makes an individual plan for each student based on the data provided by assessments. The goal is to provide the students receiving services with the tools to comprehend and produce language on their own to become proficient and to be successful in the curriculum. Scaffolding in the form of vocabulary and grammar aids are provided to each student for use within their classroom and conferencing with classroom teachers and the ENL teacher assures that the content being studied in the classroom is also taking place outside of the classroom in small groups. All lessons are aligned to the Common Core and address English as a New Language standards. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Throughout the year, both language objectives and content objectives are addressed both in and out of the classroom. Hands on activities are always encouraged to activate all of the senses: hearing, vision, touch, smell and taste. Language imprinting becomes more permanent with memories created with multiple senses. The ENL teacher works with the classroom teachers to ensure that ELLs have multiple entry points in a lesson. Our Teacher's College balanced literacy coach and Engage NY math coach train teachers as well on how to differentiate the curriculum for ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? To best serve our ELL-SWDs Ampark Neighborhood School providers try to schedule time with students during literacy and math periods where the most language scaffolding is required. The Related Service Provider, Javier Pacheco works with the ENL teacher, the Speech teachers, Sheri Rotenberg, Monica Esquiva, the OT teacher, Sarah Lowenthal, and the PT teacher, Kathleen Apaciao in the beginning of the year to formulate a schedule. Throughout the year providers work with classroom teachers to make sure that grade level standards are being met and that the curriculum aligns with the New York City Standards and the Common Core. There are common prep periods built into the day for teachers to plan and explore student progress as a team. Students are grouped by grade and ability level depending on content area or task at hand. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The school provides targeted supplemental programs for ELL students through AIS services both during the day and after school. These programs are offered in English and include one-to one, and/or small group instruction with our AIS teacher and classroom teachers, based on student’s individual needs. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the consideration of programs for the upcoming year, we always consult the parent choice surveys and study the data from TCRWP assessments as well as the NYSESLAT to see if there are any new patterns or need for improvements. This year we have included a part-time literacy coach and 2 additional ICT classes. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At this time we will continue our push in/pull out program for ELLs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students fully participate in all of the school’s literacy and math programs and receive additional support, scaffolding, and differentiated instruction, so that they are able to participate successfully. The school uses the Engage NY math program. Teachers receive monthly support in and out of the classroom from a math coach. This program emphasizes multiple entry points for learning concepts through breaking apart numbers and use with manipulates and is fully aligned to the Common Core Standards. Our school follows the balanced literacy model and this is supported by a part-time literacy coach. This program offers students a variety of learning experiences in literacy through different contexts, such as: read alouds, 7  shared/modeled writing, word work, shared reading, guided reading, literacy center, and independent reading and writing. Students also participate in programs that teach the arts and science through out of classroom teachers and supplemental programs. Students are actively engaged in studio art, music (choral and instrumental), architecture, theater, physical education and environmental science. The school provides supplemental programs for ELL students through AIS services, as described above. Our school provides after school extracurricular activities through the Roads to Success program. This program has professionals in theater, art, conflict management, physical education, and math and literacy support for students. The curriculum of the school supports these content areas on a daily or weekly basis during the normal school day. The school also offers Alvin Ailey, 6 week cycle sports programs, and Inside Broadway. ELL students fully participate in all extracurricular activities and these programs help support the academic work that is done both in and out of the classroom. AmPark employs materials based curricula in all subject areas allowing our students the ability to use many different modalities in their approaches to learning. This allows our ELLs to have many ways of expressing their learning. Our ELLs have native language trade books and dictionaries available. All testing materials, where applicable, are made available in the student’s native language. We have classroom computers and Smart Boards in our classroom as a result of a grant. ELLs have equal access to these as do all other AmPark students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Each classroom has a fully stocked library with books on many levels. In classrooms with ELL students, there are also books available in the students' native languages and access to several classroom computers. Students use many online resources to encourage language acquisition as well as to study content area topics. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is offered to our ELLs through trade books and online resources that are readily available. All testing materials, where applicable, are made available in the student’s native language. There are also several staff members available to support children in their native language when required. All of our services and resources support and correspond to our ELLs age and grade levels. Students are offered AIS with our SETTS instructor, ENL, and after school programs as needed based on their individual needs as assessed through our quantitative assessments: TCRWP running records, Engage NY Unit assessments, and teacher on-going assessments. All incoming families visit and tour the school before registration. Students are encouraged to spend time in our classrooms so that they can become familiar with the teachers and schoolmates. AmPark holds a Meet and Greet with all of our families within the first few days of the school year so that students, parents, and teachers can get to know each other and become familiar with the school’s educational mission. The school employs staff members who are able to translate for families who require assistance. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All of our ELLs are supported throughout the day by Ilesa Borges Carvalho, the ENL teacher, their classroom teachers and para professionals. Our 5 ELLs with disabilities are supported by ICT classes with full-time special education teacher. Other staff who provide services to ELLs are the OT, PT, AP and Speech teachers. All services correspond to ELL's ages and grade levels as well as their ability levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? 8  Each classroom has a fully stocked library with books on many levels. In classrooms with ELL students, there are also books available in the students' native languages and access to several classroom computers. Students use many online resources to encourage language aquisition as well as to study content area topics. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All incoming families visit and tour the school before registration. Students are encouraged to spend time in our classrooms so that they can become familiar with the teachers and schoolmates. AmPark holds a Meet and Greet with all of our families within the first few days of school so that students, parents, and teachers can get to know each other and become familiar with the school’s educational mission. The school employs staff members who are able to translate for families who require assistance. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? At this time our electives are in music, art education, physical education, and science. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not currently offer a dual language program. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development is provided to our common branch, subject, ENL and SETTS teachers in house during the Monday PD times. These PDs are facilitated by outside consultants, administrative staff, the literacy coach, and other teachers. Teachers also attend outside PDs such as Teachers College for literacy, the Bronx Field Support Center, etc. The staff turnkeys the training during the Monday PD alloted time, common preps, and common planning time. The principal, ENL teacher, and other members of the LAP team will participate in ELL training provided by the NYC DOE Bronx Field Support Office. At present, The ENL teacher collaborates, both in meetings and during common prep periods, with all teachers and support staff in offering suggestions for effective ENL instruction. Our commitment to and growing expertise in authentic assessment practices has allowed us to more clearly identify students’ individual needs. We are providing Professional Development that supports our teachers in understanding and provisioning for the needs of ELL students alongside their classmates. Professional development for teachers of ELLs is offered in house during Monday PD time and during the week through inter visitation among teachers and lab sites with the literacy and math coaches. Both classroom and service providers, such as the SETSS and ENL teachers, also attend curriculum workshops at Teacher's College where literacy development is analyzed. Word work, fluency, vocabulary, and grammar are the focus of the workshops. The teachers will also attends professional development through the Bronx Field Support office and turnkeys this information to other teachers of ELLs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 9  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We will provide our ELLs with the support that they will need to be successful in middle school. We focus not only on their ENL instruction and academic work but on the organizational, and social and emotional growth that will be needed as they move on to a new school. This work will be completed by the classroom and ESL teachers in consult with our out of classroom support staff. The entire staff attends Monday staff development meetings, for a total of four hours and forty minutes a month. This time is spent enforcing pedagogical practices for teachers and focuses on children through the descriptive review process. The classroom teachers as well as the ENL teacher provides PD to the entire staff using best practices and on the needs of ELL students learning how to adapt lessons for multiple entry points. Meeting agendas and/or attendance records of all training PD sessions and/or meetings are kept by the Assistant Principal. All pedagogues attend PDs conducted by the TCRWP, in-house Monday PD time, and other off site training, which focus on teaching language through content. The ENL teacher attends monthly ENL Liaison meetings and other ENL training provided by the Bronx Field Support Center and turnkeys this information to other staff during common planning times. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The mandated annual meetings with parents of ELLs will take place once a year in addition to the regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences. Parents can also schedule other conference times as needed during the school year. The meetings will take place on the Tuesday parent communication time or another scheduled time that is convenient for the ENL teacher as well as the parent . The ENL teacher will backpack conference forms to each ELL student. During these meetings the ENL teacher will discuss the academic and language achievements and language development needs in all content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. AmPark has an active Parent Association (PA) and all families are encouraged to participate and attend General Meetings. The PA hosts a monthly Coffee and Conversation where parents can socialize and meet with the Principal. There is also a monthly morning PA meeting that follows the evening PA meeting each month. This allows a double opportunity for parents to hear information about the school and to ask questions. The school has an open-door policy where families can come in and work with their child’s class sharing their personal knowledge and/or experiences that teach about different cultures. The school hosts Family Literacy and Math Nights led by our Coaches and teachers to inform families of in school practices and strategies to support learning at home. While we have a small number of ELLs, we do have a number of bilingual families and staff members who are available to translate when needed. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0  1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Christine Mccourt, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Christine McCourt Title Principal Kelly Lennon Assistant Principal Angela Lebron Parent Coordinator Ilesa Borges Carvalho ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Javier Pacheco - Related Servi Teacher/Subject Area Sheri Rotenburg - Speach Teacher/Subject Area Priya Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 1/1/01 6/29/17 6/29/17 6/29/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x344 School Name: AmParkNeighborhood School Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Andrea Bonnie Dudzinski Durgin ENL Teacher Yes - on 11/30/2017 Assistant Principal No Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At AmPark Neighborhood School, we use Department of Education Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS) to determine the languages that are spoken, written, read and preferred by our students and their families. Once this information is collected, it is entered into our student database. Based on this data, staff are then able to communicate and collaborate with families about the best ways that AmPark can reach out to them and create an inviting and inclusive educational setting for all. We use this reporting to determine how we can linguistically support our school community with opportunities such as in-person interpreters at events like Back to School Night, interpretation supports that are needed for parent teacher conferences, and what language translations are needed for fliers and communications that go home to families from the school. 4  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Arabic Russian Bulgarian Estonian Tigrinya Urdu Ukrainian Data As Of 389 27 4 2 1 1 1 1 1 9/12/2018 91.1 6.32 0.94 0.47 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.23 x 385 32 4 2 0 1 1 1 1 x 90.16 7.49 0.94 0.47 0 0.23 0.23 0.23 0.23 x 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A – As of 9/12/18 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? AmPark Owl Monthly AmPark Blog Weekly Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our newsletter is compiled and disseminated from our school website, which has a drop down menu at the top that allows for the Owl and the entire website to be translated into multiple languages. Our blog is compiled and disseminated from our school website, which has a drop down menu at the top that allows for the blog and the entire website to be translated into multiple languages. 5  Parent Teacher Conference Announcements November, March, May Fliers and School Event Invitations As Needed We use the DOE Intranet templates for covered languages. We use English/Spanish bilingual staff as needed. We use English/Spanish bilingual staff as needed. We use The Big Word (DOE Preferred Vendors) for other covered languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Back to School Night September Parent-Teacher Conferences November, March, May Curriculum Night November, March Tuesday Parent Time every week IEP Meetings As Needed interpretation service(s)? We use English/Spanish bilingual school staff, Language Line (phone interpretation service), and in-person interpreters as needed. We use English/Spanish bilingual school staff, Language Line (phone interpretation service), and in-person interpreters as needed. We use English/Spanish bilingual school staff, Language Line (phone interpretation service), and in-person interpreters as needed. We use English/Spanish bilingual school staff, Language Line (phone interpretation service), and in-person interpreters as needed. We use English/Spanish bilingual school staff and Language Line (phone interpretation service) as needed. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, our Building Response Team gathers together to reach out to families and caregivers that are listed as primary contacts for our students on their Emergency Contact Cards (Blue Cards) over the phone. As many of our limited-English proficient families are Spanish speaking, we are able to utilize the staff members, teachers, and office staff that can interpret in Spanish to assist with these phone calls. We can also use Language Line (phone interpretation service) to contact families of all students as needed. 6  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator (LAC) provides information to the staff through Professional Development about the availability of interpretation services, both over the phone and in person, as well as the ability to translate documents using the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit and The Big Word (DOE Vendor). The LAC also shares the phone number and login information for staff to access Language Line (phone interpretation service). Staff is provided with a voluntary survey where they can indicate the languages they are able to provide interpretation and translation services in, and their comfort level in assisting with these services at AmPark. All staff is then made aware of the language resources that we have within our own staff, and how to request and access these in-house services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Multilingual Welcome Poster is hung prominently in our lobby, letting families know that language resources are available. The Language ID Guide and Parent Guides to Language Access are also provided visibly on the desk in the Main Office. The Language Access Coordinator (LAC) reaches out to the families who have indicated that they prefer communication in languages other than English via the Language Line (over the phone interpretation service) to offer additional over the phone and in-person interpretation services for events such as Back to School Night, Parent/Teacher Conferences and IEP Meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The annual Language Translation and Interpretation Unit survey, which is made available in the nine primary languages provided by the DOE, is provided to AmPark families who have indicated that they prefer to receive written or oral communication from the school in a language other than English. This survey asks families to provide feedback to the school about the information they received throughout the year about their right to translation and interpretation services, as well as their opinion on the quality of these services and communication from staff if they were received. 7 
