2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X363 School Name: ACADEMY FOR PERSONAL LEADERSHIP AND EXCELLENCE Principal: ANGELO LEDDA 2018-19 RSCEP-R 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Academy for Personal Leadership and Excellence 321000010363 6-8 School Number (DBN): 10X363 120 E. 184 th Street Bronx NY 10468 7182203139 7182206018 Phone Number: Fax: Angelo Ledda aledda@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Wediko Angelo Ledda Daniel Rivera James McFadden PascualaFernandez Maurice Childs Ramona Almonte District Information MaribelHulla Superintendent: One Fordham Plaza Bronx NY Room 836 Bronx NY MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 7187415852 Phone Number: 7187417098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: One Fordham Plaza Bronx NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 7188287776 Phone Number: 7187417098 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with 2018-19 RSCEP-R 5  the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development 2018-19 RSCEP-R 6  The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure 2018-19 RSCEP-R 7  how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 8   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Angelo Ledda James McFadden PascualaFernandez Jessica Hilton Ramona Almonte Danny Rivera Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 10  Check if SLT X Name Position and Constituent Group Represented CBO Representative, if applicable/ X X X X X X X X X na na Vanessa Taveras Maria Carmona Paulo Tejada Maurice Childs na na Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Parent Parent Staff Staff na na Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 RSCEP-R 11  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. 1. APLE is located in District 10 in the Bronx and houses approximately 600 students grades 6-8 with an attendance average of 92.4%. The male to female percentage breakdown of the student population is 57% to 43% with ethnic demographics registering at 11% African American, 86% Latino, 2% Pacific Islander and 1% White. Ninety seven percent of students at APLE are listed as economically disadvantaged. APLE has a 42% ELL population, with proficiency levels ranging from newcomers up to commanding. ELL students are instructed part of their programmed day in proficiency groupings at their grade level. Additional ESL services are provided with a push in model in core content areas. The majority of ELL students identify Spanish as their native language with a smaller percentage of French, Fulani and Thai. Students with Disabilities comprise 32% of the student population ranging from speech classifications to autism. Each grade level offers placement in the following classes: ICT, ASD NEST and 12:1:1. A coteaching model is in place for ICT and NEST classes as well as paraprofessional supports in self contained classes. As a Renewal School that already has a community based organization partnership, school tone and culture of respect and responsibility, low teacher turnover and high student attendance, APLE needs to improve upon pushing students to proficiency on the NYS assessments. As a community and PBIS school, APLE has designed a place where families and students feel welcomed and safe. Teachers and students truly enjoy coming to work and each and every stake holder plays a role in the success of the child. 2. At APLE we believe that children will learn best through three core values, respect, responsibility and leadership. We feel that each child is different and may learn in different ways. We focus on educating the whole child, academically, socially, emotionally, mentally and physically. 3. APLE makes great progress with students who are low performing. We move students who are ELL students or students with disabilities up at least one performance level within their three years here at APLE. This is evident in our prior NYC progress report and yearly School Quality Snapshot. 4. As per the newly released Framework for Great Schools, MS 363 scored 3 out of 4 on each of the 6 components. 6. The strengths of APLE are Effective Leadership, Collaborative Teachers and Trust. 7. Currently APLE has partnerships with WEDIKO, ENACT and MHHC. Through these partnerships, APLE has created a safe and healthy environment for all students to learn. 8. All students at APLE are offered the Extended Learning Time program and this year all students have signed up for the extended time. This time consists of academic intervention, homework help and then recreation and/or sports. Moving forward, our ELT will be facilitated on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40pm-3:40pm as well as Monday through Thursday mornings from 7:15am-8:15am. The Vision of 363 is to improve student performance so that all students will positively impact the community through leadership, respect and responsibility. The students will acquire the tools they need to develop their highest intellectual, social and personal potential. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 12  As the core Mission, the Academy is committed to develop socially conscious leaders of the future, in a safe learning environment where students can take risks, achieve academic success, and demonstrate social responsibility. Staff will implement a rigorous, standards-based curriculum with a community service component. This will empower students to develop their role in society. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X363 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 557 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 43 43 6 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 17 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 91.6% % Reduced Lunch 33.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 86.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.25 2% 22% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A YSH NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 62 62 8 92.9% 2.7% 25.5% 10.2% 1.6% 0.5% 4 34% 6.3 10.2% 35% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-R 14  2018-19 RSCEP-R 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Area of Focus (SOP 3.3): Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. Data Sources: District Instructional walkthroughs, iReady data, Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Survey, Advance and student performance data. Based on the 2017-2018 Quality Review Report, although we received a Proficient Rating in the area of 2.2 Assessment, based on observation data, the use of formative and summative assessment data can be better utilized to inform instructional decisions to meet the needs of all students. Teachers currently use a wide range of formative and summative assessment sources such as iReady, NYS Item Skills Analysis, baseline and end of unit assessments, student self assessment (target cards and student standards tracking), and exit slips. Although teachers collect various data points, the use of data to inform targeted and differentiated instruction can be more consistent, visible and strategic in their planning and instruction. Based on the co-interpretation, we found that rigorous instruction was one area for growth that we will address via proficiency grouping for our English Language Learners. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 16  The overall Instructional Focus for the 2018-2019 school year is, "all teachers will provide students opportunities through discussion and discourse to think critically as they justify their reasoning using evidence across content areas". Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? At APLE MS 363, through discussion and discourse, all teachers will provide students opportunities to think critically as they justify their reasoning using evidence across content areas. We will promote the consistent implementation of this focus by the following actions: 1. Instructional focus is posted in all classrooms throughout the school building. 2. Students are engaged in academic conversations, justification of thought and critical thinking in each classroom daily. 3. Teachers are engaged in professional learning cycles around school wide instructional protocols and routines that support the instructional focus across grades and content areas for all learners. 4. School leaders including teacher leaders and administration routinely conduct instructional walkthroughs focused on implementation of the instructional protocols and routines to support the instructional focus. 5. Parent workshops are offered throughout the year to inform and engage the community members in understanding the school’s instructional focus and offers tools for parents to support their students at home. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? APLE MS 363 will continue to align all curricula to the CCLS, and each core content area will create year- long curriculum maps which integrate target Reading Standards and/or Mathematical Practice Standards as well as power standards with accompanying daily, weekly, and unit assessments aligned to these standards. 1. All APLE staff will extend the work of the summer reading assignment, "Culturally Responsive Teaching & The Brain" by Zaretta Hammond by engaging in a professional learning cycle to ultimately enhance current units of study with culturally responsive teaching practices. 2. All APLE staff will engage in Professional Learning cycle focused on collaborative teaching models that support diverse learners. 3. Curriculum planning began with an analysis of the June instructional reports. During this week long planning session, teachers across disciplines developed a list of protocols to compliment APLE’s instructional focus as well as creating entry points for diverse learners. 4. All students at APLE meet in small group advisory twice per week to discuss ways their habits and community habits support all students. This time allows for staff to understand specific needs and traits of a small subset of students that they teach in order to help identify supports and promotes self awareness and advocacy. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? New instructional shifts will prepare student for college and career by enhancing student opportunities to use discussion and discourse think critically as they justify their reasoning using evidence across content areas. Integration of a 1:1 chromebook program in each class 1. 2. College and high school visits 2018-19 RSCEP-R 17 3. Weekly High School application clinics 4. Curriculum that embeds 21st century skills such as critical thinking, problem solving, argument and academic discourse. 5. Multiple leadership opportunities such as student government, peer mediators, lion leaders 6. Specialized high school prep classes for 7th and 8th graders 7. Regents courses offered in Algebra and US History What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? There will be both heterogeneous and homogeneous grouping within classrooms to provide multiple entry points to access the instructional focus through the four modalities. Prioritizing Domain 3 in planning, delivery and assessment will help bring the instructional focus to life in all classrooms. Students will be grouped within each classroom as the lesson takes place with beginning, mid point and final checks of understanding by the teacher. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? There will be both heterogeneous and homogeneous grouping within classrooms to provide multiple entry points into the curricula, including students at or approaching standard levels. Consistency will be supported between school faculty and community educators by having both teams work together to develop curriculum plans, standards-based rubrics, differentiated tasks/exit slips and enrichment opportunities for students during grade level and content meetings. Students will also have the opportunity to work in stations, read leveled text and work independently. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? iReady performance on benchmark assessments compared to iReady fall diagnostic 1. 2. Pre and post unit assessments 3. Baseline, Midline and Endline assessments 4. Lesson plans adapted based on exit slip data, homework and in class checks for understanding 5. ELT grouping based on iReady data 6. Morning Math students invited based on iReady data 7. Vacation academy students invited based on cusp status Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type (diagnostic, formative, Grades Implemented Purpose benchmark, summative) IReady iReady Iready Ready diagnostic diagnostic benchmark Formative Part 3 – Annual Goal 6-8 6-8 6-8 once per year September Two times per year Winter and Spring Two times per year Fall and Spring 2018-19 RSCEP-R 18  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, MS 363 will see a decrease of students scoring level 1 by 15% and an increase of level 2-3 by 3 % in both ELA and Math. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Average ELA Proficiency Rating will improve. ELA Performance Index Math Performance Index Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 19  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers will analyze data from NYS assessments to identify cusp students Cusp students (push/slip L1/2, L2/3) Rigorous Instruction October 2018-May 2019 Admin and teacher leaders Teachers will develop and monitor action plans for cusp students Teachers will engage in inquiry around cusp students and strategies that support their growth Students will participate in individualized learning plans based on iReady diagnostic and benchmark assessments throughout the year Students will track their own progress of standards mastery across content areas Administration will conduct data chats with all teachers to analyze progress of cusp students throughout the year All students Rigorous Instruction Teachers October 2018-May 2019 All teachers Rigorous Instruction Administration October 2018-May 2019 Instructional Cabinet Team will review school wide cusp student data All students and teachers Rigorous Instruction IST Team October 2018-May 2019 How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) I-Ready, Ready, TC Writing pieces, Performance Tasks, Unit Assessments I-Ready, Ready, TC Writing pieces, Performance Tasks, Unit Assessments, iReady I-Ready, Ready, TC Writing pieces, Performance Tasks, Unit Assessments I-Ready, Ready, TC Writing pieces, 2018-19 RSCEP-R 20  quarterly to monitor progress and determine school wide next steps or revisions Parent teacher conferences will include data chats with their child and teacher Parents and students Family Engagement, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment Teachers Three times per year during parent teacher conferences 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Performance Tasks, Unit Assessments I-Ready, Ready, TC Writing pieces, Performance Tasks, Unit Assessments How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In September, parent information sessions are offered and facilitated by teacher leaders in the four major content areas as well as Special Education and English as a New Language. In these sessions, parents are offered several resources such as classroom data, Skedula access, I Ready results and standard based unit plans. Throughout the year, parents are included in monthly family events such as the annual back to school carnival, family Halloween night, game night and a holiday celebration. Parent conferences and parent outreach help parents support their children through the rigor of the CCLS in each grade level. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Summer curriculum planning. 5 days x 4hrs per day x 9 staff Funding for purchasing of 70 summer reading for staff texts Per session Per diem OTPS Supplies Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 21  By February 2019, MS 363 will see a 15% decrease of students scoring 2 or more grade levels below and a 3% increase of students scoring on grade level as evidenced by the winter iReady benchmark assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady benchmark assessment Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Supportive Environment Strengths  Positive Behavior Intervention Supports (PBIS)/ and Response to Intervention (RTI) initiatives that focuses on tiered targeted strategies  Over-arching systems that provide individualized plans for students that require higher levels of intervention  Staff communication & support. This occurs during the daily staff check-In during morning meeting, weekly update emails, morning message boards, shared Google drive with the entire staff. Grade team meetings that consist of the director of student affairs, social workers, teachers, administrators, CBO's , and others who case conference weekly with the grade. Social Emotional Team ( Wediko, Morris Heights Social Workers, School Social Workers, School Psychologist) meets biweekly to discuss ongoing concerns and needs of the school .   Data sources, Quality Review, PPO and Learning Environment Survey  Some data sources are the Adverse Childhood Experience survey (ACE survey) that measures student levels of trauma.  We also use the Social Skills Improvement System that measures student's social skills and problem behaviors.  We use the New Visions Data Sorter and Heat Map to analyze data and track student attendance, outreach , and data patterns.  We use Skedula and OORS reports to track student behaviors and patterns of behaviors. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 23   We use the school snapshot and survey to analyze the data to inform decision making. Needs: While the school strategically aligns professional development, family outreach, and student learning experiences and supports, resulting in the adoption of effective academic and personal needs, the principal will continue to strengthen structures such as the Positive Behavior Intervention Support (PBIS) system in place for continued improvement by analyzing al the different data sources to guide next steps. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? 1. How would you want school stakeholders to describe the school? We would want stakeholders to describe the Academy for Personal Leadership and Excellence as a safe space for students to learn and push the boundaries of their own expectations. A space where exploration is encouraged through the supportive use of a caring faculty that helps students strive for excellence. 2. What do the CBO partnerships look like? How do they sustain and support the social and emotional growth and health of your students? The current CBO partnerships have been established for several years. Wediko will continue to work on the relationships established with ENACT, Morris Heights Health Center, and Inwood House staff to coordinate the programming details, ensuring that the organizational focus will be matched to the student need. Wediko, ENACT, and Morris Heights will provide direct mental health services through individual, small group, or whole class intervention. 3. How is student voice and leadership supported? We will work to build off of the school council and student leadership board already in place. By collaborating with the school social worker in charge of the project the Community School resources can help provide trainings around student leadership. 4. What social-emotional learning framework will your school adopt (RULER, PBIS, etc.)? In addition to expanding on the current PBIS work, MS 363 will look to further its Tier 1 supports by providing classroom based opportunities for students to learn the expectations set in the schools matrix and school-wide manual. By explicitly teaching the Positive Behaviors of the school community students will have a clearer understanding of the building norms. Given the strong connection between PBIS programming and academic enrichment, the APLE team strongly believes that any SEL support provided will help students progress in the classroom. 5. How should the school be more proactive in promoting improved students social-emotional skills? How should counseling happen? MS 363 will use an initial student focused needs assessment to gauge the range of services needed for every child in the building. In giving each student the space to discuss goals both academically and socially, we are setting the expectations for success and listening to the voice of the young people in the building. 6. How will your school team measure social-emotional development? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 24  In addition to the more traditional methods of collecting ODR and suspension data Wediko will be assessing every student using the Social Skills Improvement System Rating Scales (SSIS-RS) a quantitative questionnaire that functions as a pre and post that will help to gauge the effectiveness of the interventions provided. 7. How would teachers, community partners, and school leaders use data to respond to student social and emotional RSCEP-PF 14 needs? Given that the space and time (Grade Team Meetings) for discussion are already in place these meetings will be used to review the data collected for individual case conferences and classrooms. In addition a weekly cabinet meeting will be held to review whole school progress which will help set the agenda for the grade team meetings. 8. Indicate how your attendance and chronic absenteeism rates will improve? With staff trained in the AIDP model the Wediko team will work to re-engage ATR’s and students who are struggling to attend regularly. Our initial needs assessment will also provide the SEL team with the information to assign the appropriate resources where needed. In addition given the current attendance baseline for MS 363 we will continue to build on the strategies currently in place. We will use the heat map to develop strategies and interventions for student's specific needs. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Wediko Morris Heights Health Center ENACT NA CBO Focus Social, Emotional, Attendance Academic, Social, Emotional, Physical Attendance, Social Emotional Learning NA How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? We will create a supportive environment and engagement with our students and families in partnership with our CBO by: * By having CBO staff embedded during the instructional day in academic classrooms. * Creating programs such as student council, peer mediation, Lion Leaders, and Green team to support student leadership efforts in and around the school. *Support students through attendance interventions and outreach by targeting students at the beginning of the year and through out the year in high risk needs categories such as severely chronically absent , chronically absent, and at risk categories. Success mentors will be paired with these at risk students to improve student attendance. *We will support students social emotional well being by administering the ACE survey and ______ survey that will identify student needs and will will support them by. he support needed for the social/emotional health of our students will be consistent. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 25  Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, MS 363 will continue to strengthen and support a safe and engaging learning environment where students are motivated to come to school as evidenced by an overall attendance rate of 93%. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Student Attendance Chronic Absenteeism Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-R 26  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Comprehensive plan to incentivize higher attendance rates Chronically absent students Supportive Environment September 2018- June 2019 Attendance Team Advisory Classes All Students Supportive Environment September 2018- June 2019 Teachers and Advisory Point Person(s) Deans of Students How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Check in on chronically absent students and monitor progress of incentive programs in February 2019. Analyze OORS data, attendance data and In School Suspension rates Professional Learning Plan that incorporates Culturally Responsive Teaching practices All Staff Supportive Environment, Rigorous Instruction Summer 2018-June 2019 Administration, Teacher Leaders and CBO Curriculum Review 2018-19 RSCEP-R 27  CBO (Wediko) supports / side by side/ afterschool (plan developed with CBO) Identified At- Risk Students Supportive Environment October 2018-June 2019 Wediko Wediko staff will analyze OORS data, attendance data and In school Suspension rates Attendance at Community Events Community Events All MS 363 families Supportive Environment, Parent and Family Engagement September 2018-June 2019 SLT, PBIS, Wediko 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Family Nights - PBIS Team, Parent Coordinator Monthly Community Events Calendar - Parent Coordinator, Wediko Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding for Family Events and Supplies Funding for teacher training on classroom management P/F Set Aside for per diem for teacher who attended training OTPS Per Diem Per Session Supplies Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century C4E 2018-19 RSCEP-R 28  Title I 1003(a) Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, overall attendance will be at or above 93%. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Attendance Reports and New Visions Attendance Heat Map Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: X SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 4 .5 Priority Needs - Teachers use data and information collected from both formative and summative data sources to plan for instruction and modify instruction based on the needs of students. Data sources, Quality Review, PPO As MS 363 is still awaiting the 2017-2018 SQR Report, but based on the 2016-2017 Quality Review Report for 10X363 in the area of Instructional Core (Indicator 1.2 Pedagogy), the school received a rating of “Proficient”. This was also the recommended area of focus. Feedback in this area stated “Across classrooms teacher questioning provides students with inconsistent student entry to lessons taught resulting in student work products that demonstrate uneven levels of high level thinking.” As per the 2017-2018 SQR report for 10X363 in the area of the Instructional Core (Indicator 1.1 Curriculum, the school received a rating of well-developed. Feedback in this area stated 2018-19 RSCEP-R 30  Utilizing the feedback, teacher teams have met with an educational consultant for support in elevating the level of practice surrounding Domain 3 of the Danielson Framework. Our professional development plan has been tailored to this focus by analyzing different pedagogical practices which build upon rigorous differentiated learning experiences for all students. Content meetings have prioritized building dialogue and modifying curricula to include more engaging learning experiences and tasks with a particular focus on deepening learning through questioning which enables higher order critical thinking. This will remain a high area of concern and a priority focus for the 2018-2019 school year . Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 1. APLE MS 363 is organized to promote teacher collaboration in a variety of ways and will continue this during the 2018-2019 school year. Teachers engage in one grade level and one content area meetings weekly. During this time, teachers work to improve instruction through careful analysis of school-wide, grade level, class-wide, and individual student data trends. During content area meetings teachers use this information to modify curriculum to meet the needs of all learners. Teachers consistently modify curricula in teams, based on daily and weekly formative assessment data. 2. A culture has been built with the importance of formative assessment at the forefront and a teachers’ student self assessment "target card" and "exit ticket" data is the most important influence in the creation of daily lesson plans and modification of unit plans. Currently, teachers have been working on grouping students based on individual strengths and weaknesses using this formative assessment data. This is evident in daily lesson plans, student self-assessments, as well as student choice summative assessments to enhance critical thinking in the classroom. Next year, we plan to continue to use I-Ready data to track the Lexile levels and reading comprehension progress of our students. 3. This will add to the plethora of data that we currently use to inform our practice and will allow us to further modify curriculum in all content areas that is tailored to our overarching goal of critical thinking for all learners. 4. As we progress into the next school year and beyond, we will continue to build upon this community of collaboration by ensuring opportunities for content area teachers to work together to create interdisciplinary project based learning opportunities increasing the level of engagement, rigor, and coherent curricula in all subjects. 5. MS 363 is a Datawise school with our Math department as the model datawise team which will continue into the 2018-2019 school year. Meeting wise structures are in place for all teacher team meetings that are conducted in the building. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? APLE MS363 is organized to promote teacher collaboration in a variety of ways and will continue this during the 2018-2019 school year. The cabinet meets weekly with the Instructional Support Team which consists of teacher leaders in each content area. During these meetings, the team looks at multiple data sources to determine what and how teacher teams will focus on throughout the year. At the end of the prior year 2017-2018, the Instructional Focus was developed based on data from the Quality Review and Advance data. The Instructional Focus will steer all Professional Development Plans for the year. At the beginning of each PL Cycle, and again at the end of each PL cycle, the data will be reviewed to determine the direction of the PL cycles going forward The Instructional cabinet Team is the main vehicle through which PL is planned developed based on these school wide goals. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 31  Teachers engage in one grade level and one content area meeting weekly. During this time, teachers work together to improve instruction through careful analysis of school-wide, grade level, class-wide, and individual student data trends. During content area meetings teachers use this information to modify curriculum to meet the needs of all learners. Teachers consistently modify curricula in teams, based on daily and weekly formative assessment data. As we progress into the next school year and beyond, we will continue to build upon this community of collaboration by ensuring professional learning opportunities for content area teachers. Along with our CBO Wediko, teachers work together to create learning opportunities increasing the level of engagement, deepening questioning and modifying assessment to promote higher order thinking in line with our Instructional Focus. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? All teachers and paraprofessionals sit on at least two teacher teams. There are content teams which are vertical teams and there are grade level teams which are horizontal teams. Because teachers and paraprofessionals all sit on both teams, there is both natural and intentional collaboration across these teams. In grade teams, the priorities are introduced and the implications for grade level work is established and carried through at these meetings. During the content level teams, the priorities are then explored more deeply in terms of each content. At the beginning of each PL cycle, the entire staff meets to establish shared goals and expectations and at the end, the whole staff meets to share their work and their findings which is then used to adjust the following PL cycles. Across content teams, the ELA, ENL and SS teams and Math and Science teams will work together to align units of study and ensure that the work across contents is connected for students. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent I-Ready Determine starting point for each student and develop individual action plan Student Work Samples Align student work to CCLS Align to unit anchor CCLS Student Choice Summative Assessment Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, MS 363 will see a decrease of students scoring level 1 by 15% and an increase of level 2-3 by 3 % in both ELA and Math. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? Collaborative Teachers Performance Index on State ELA exam Performance Index on State Math exam 2018-19 RSCEP-R 32 ELA and Math proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-R 33  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. PLC focused on Collaborative Teaching Professional Learning Plan that incorporates Culturally Responsive Teaching practices PLC 5 Practices For Orchestrating Productive Math Discussions Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Models that supports diverse learners All teachers and paraprofessionals Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers June 2018-June 2019 Field Support Center Instructional Leads Instructional walkthroughs All staff Rigorous Instruction, Collaborative Teachers, Supportive Environment Summer 2018-June 2019 District TDEC, Administration, Teacher Leaders and CBO Curriculum Review Math Teachers Collaborative Teachers, Rigorous Instruction October 2018-June 2019 Field Support Center Instructional Leads Danielson 3B Collaborative Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Administration and Teacher Leaders iReady growth against Fall Diagnostic 2018-19 RSCEP-R 34  Grade team inquiry for target cusp students Teachers in grade teams All teachers during grade team meeting 2018-19 RSCEP-R 35  4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly Family Events Monthly Newsletters Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. teacher training Per Session Per Diem OPTS Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, MS 363 will see a 15% decrease of students scoring 2 or more grade levels below and a 3% increase of students scoring on grade level as evidenced by the winter iReady benchmark assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. iReady winter benchmark assessment Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 X 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? 1. The Principal will focus on direct communication with all stakeholders of the vision/mission throughout the entire school year, ensuring it is clear and concise. 2. Leadership is considered a strength as made evident by the Framework for Great Schools Report. The Learning Environment Survey identified that all stakeholders trust the Principal. 3. Next Step for Principal: Focus more on inclusive leadership with our teacher leadership pool to strengthen the pedagogical practices to support student achievement and the 2018/2019 instructional focus. Data Sources: Quality Review, Learning Environment Survey, School Quality Report Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? 1. As our continued partnership with WEDIKO enters year eight at The Academy for Personal Leadership and Excellence (APLE), we continue to focus on the entire child, entire community, and all school stakeholders. Planning for all that begins with our School Leadership Team (SLT) which consists of our principal, teachers, parents and other stakeholders. The SLT team will guide the process behind the decisions that are made at APLE for the entire school community. As a 2018-19 RSCEP-R 37  community that already focuses on the whole child we will continue the work with social/emotional health, physical wellness, mental stability and academic rigor. Throughout every square inch of the building and surrounding areas, this focus will continue into the 2018/2019 school year. All stakeholders are effectively communicated via newsletters, emails, phone calls, home visits, meetings, workshops, and family nights. 2. As a part of the continued process of procedures and routines that are set in place at APLE, academic scheduling begins in June of the prior school year by first looking at the New York State mandates for required credits. Classes are offered to students based on New York State regulations and academic awareness. The schedules are blocked for 6 th and 7 th graders but individualized for 8 th graders in order to offer regents course to our 8th grade students. 3. Classroom observations are conducted by the principal and assistant principals. This year, as was done last year, each administrator has a set amount of observations to complete based on the amount of staff designated by the principal. Benchmarks are set three times starting in November and ending in May. All classroom observations and year end conferences are completed by May 31 of the respective school year. 4. The principal, in his 12th year, will continue to delegate to his staff. By meeting weekly with his Instructional Support Team (IST)--some may call this the cabinet team--the principal will be clear with expectations for the year, delegate responsibilities to each team member, and then set benchmarks to check for completion of each assigned task. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? The principal, in his 12th year will continue to delegate responsibilities to his staff. By meeting weekly with his IST team, he will be clear with all expectations for the school year. He will delegate to each team member and then set benchmarks to check for completion of each assigned task. An area of focus for the principal will be the evaluation of systems/programs and procedures to measure the impact on student learning. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? 1. Transparency and trust are two important areas of focus of the administration at APLE. To ensure consistent transparency and high levels of trust, the administration works with all stakeholders to communicate the mission/vision as well as a team decision making process. The Mission and Vision and the Instructional Focus are communicated to all school stakeholders though the School Leadership Team, The Instructional Support Team, Staff and Parent Handbooks, Family Nights and events, Back to School Nights, Parent teacher Conferences, Progress Reports, Skedula. Our partnership with our CBO, Wediko also supports our school's vision of the whole child wellness. Our three grade houses each have a focus: Respect, Responsibility and Leadership which are key values associated with being a member of our school Community. These Values and traits are encouraged through grade wide assemblies and P.B.I.S structures. 2. The Instructional Focus is developed with the Instructional Support Team by looking at multiple data sources and observational data. The Instructional Focus is shared across the school and adorns every classroom and office. The Instructional Focus is the umbrella under which all Professional Learning falls under. The Instructional priorities for each teacher team must align to the school's Instructional Focus. Classroom walkthroughs with school leadership always focuses on the evidence of the Instructional Focus. Is our Instructional Focus obvious to an outside visitor? Do students and teachers know what the focus is? Do the classrooms speak to the Instructional Focus? 3. Ways in which administration will accomplish this are as follows; SLT, Students/parent orientation, staff/student/parent handbooks, mission/vision shared and posted throughout entire building, weekly parent workshops, strong teacher teams, Instructional Support Team and an active parent association. As a community that already focuses on the whole child, we will continue that work with social/emotional health, physical wellness, mental stability and academic rigor. Throughout every square inch of the building and surrounding areas, this focus will 2018-19 RSCEP-R 38 continue into the 2018/2019 school year. All stakeholders are communicated to effectively via newsletters, emails, phone calls, home visits, meetings, parent workshops and family nights. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? Through the teacher leadership program, APLE will support one master teacher, three peer collaborative teachers and three model teachers to support the staff. These teacher leaders will focus on improving classroom instruction by modeling and coaching on a daily basis, as well as leading weekly teacher teams. The teacher leaders engage in our weekly Instructional Support Team Meetings in which the implementation of our mission and vision is not only shared but action plans are created to allow for transparency which creates consistent practices across the school involving all stakeholders. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? 1. By meeting weekly with the Professional Learning Committee, the Principal allows for all stakeholders to have a voice. 2.All stakeholders are represented in this meeting from Parents, Staff, CBO and students and no decision is made without input from all. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy 3 -5 per week 7 days Check points created throughout the year What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Advance Student Work Advance Sample work PLC PLC Attendance Team Attendance Team Attendance Team How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Based on student enrollment and student per capita, fair student tax levy funds are used to create individualized student and programs. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 39  expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the Principal will deliver a clear, concise vision and mission for all stakeholders that will guide the curriculum and decision making process throughout the entire building. This will result in an increase of students scoring level 2-3 by 3% on both the ELA and MATH State Exams. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? Average ELA proficiency ELA PI Attendance Math proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-R 40  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Attendance Domain 3C Strong Family Community Ties June 2018-July 2019 Principal, Staff, Faculty, CBO WEDIKO Strong Family Community Ties September 2018- June 2019 Principal i-Ready Data Specialist, CBO ELT Strong Family Community Ties September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, PA President, SIT, PBIS Attendance OORS Continue to work with our CBO to create a Community School at MS 363 and offer Professional Development for all staff aligned to communication and trust. Create an Extended Learning Plan focusing on comprehension targeting our lowest performing students , ELL’s and SWD’s. Teacher Student Other school Stakeholders 10% of the lowest performing students Continue to work on our PBIS and SIT to foster positive behavior and social emotional health with parental engagement and involvement. All students, PPT/SIT team, PBIS leadership team, parents 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Starting with our July home visits, members of the school community start communicating with families early and often to establish expectations and foster trust. Communication continues with our new student orientation in August and Welcome Back Carnival in September along with our September "Meet the Teacher Night". Via the School Leadership and monthly family Nights, parents are given the opportunity to take on leadership roles and foster engagement for the whole school community. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 41  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Community School Grant. Funding for Per Diem 15 staff members for training Per Session OTPS Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By November 2018, via monitoring attendance rates of staff and the participation of staff in completion of the Learning Environment Survey, we will identify progress towards our goal by February 2019, as well as seeing a 5% increase in proficiency in iReady Diagnostics. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance, iReady Diagnostics Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their x SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths of HEDI ratings: ● Regular parent representation and participation in SLT meetings ● % Parent/family participation in monthly school family engagement events ● Principal and school staff have good relationships with local small businesses and community-based organizations. Adult Education Program (ENL)- services approximately 30-40 adults throughout the school year and summer. There are two classes, one early beginning and one late beginner. Wediko, 10X363 have, and the Bronx Adult Learning Center have created a consistent and ongoing partnership. Needs: ● Increased number of SLT parents facilitating activities during monthly family engagement events. ● Ongoing orientation for parents who are new to SLT and Parent Association (other parents mentoring those who are interested, Development of Parent Leaders, training on Robert’s Rules of Order, etc.)  Health Center could better serve families and community members – quarterly health fairs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 43  Data sources: Quality Review and LES, Community School Forum data. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? 1. All new staff including school safety officers will be given ongoing training (minimum 4 times per year) on how to create and foster a welcoming environment to families and community members, no matter what circumstances bring them to the school. All communication with families will be considered part of the larger process-oriented goal of strengthening the connection to families, instead of being limited to the content goal of communicating information. The Community School Director and CBO staff will share the vision of welcoming families with all school staff and problem-solve when awkward, difficult, or unwelcoming situations occur. 2. The school will provide regular information about the focus of the academic work that students are working on, and more specifically what the academic, and social emotional strengths and needs of their specific students are. Communication of this information will occur through printed newsletters, the school website, school app, parent workshops as well via phone calls, home visits, and through regular meetings at the school. 3. The school will continue to provide home visits to all incoming 6 th graders, in partnership with Wediko Children’s Services to foster a relationship between families and school staff. School and CBO staff will ask parents about their experience at school, in this city and in other countries through hosting a weekly Parenting Journey group. School and CBO staff will ask parents what strengths the students have, and where they may have struggled in the past. School and CBO will inquire what the parents needs from the school are in terms of support, share the school’s expectations of parent participation in school events/activities and in problem-solving around academic, social and emotional issues that their child may encounter. A parent and student handbook will be delivered on each of these visits. The 6th grade AP and the Director of Student Affairs work collaboratively to ensure students behavioral needs and school expectations are met . 4. The Academy of Personal Leadership and Excellence is fortunate to already have space set aside for parents to meet in the Parent Coordinator room. Additional office space for individual and small group counseling sessions is set aside to the CBO for the Community School Director, CBO clinicians, and advocate counselors to facilitate parent workshops and support student success. 5. Parents are surveyed at the beginning of the year to determine interest and need for various topics of workshops including: English as a second language, accessing benefits and entitlements (housing, SNAP, job training etc.), immigration and legal advice clinics, etc. This will then inform planning for parent workshops , groups, and times of day throughout the rest of the year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 44  6. Parents will receive information on student data and progress about their own children and in the aggregate about all the children in the school. Parents will be asked to participate in action planning to problem-solve the necessary supports to ensure the success of their own students and in raising the academic performance of the school . Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Families are welcomed into the school by dedicated and welcoming school safety personnel as well as main office staff to guide and direct them appropriately. The front of the building will display signs celebrating our Community School as well as the various school/community partnerships. A bulletin board on the first floor is dedicated to The Parent's Association with member's names, titles, and photos. CBO Wediko supports all members of the school community by facilitating Restorative Justice and trauma informed practices training in order to better understand collective problem-solving and mediation. The dedicated space for families in the school will be the the Parent Coordinator's resource room directly on the 1st floor, where workshops are held and parents are able to seek further information. A parent handbook is distributed to all incoming families as well is available year long in the parent coordinator's office. The parent coordinator also arranges for translating services for scheduled events as well as on a case by case basis at the parent or teacher's request. CBO office space is also dedicated to family meetings and workshops. In addition, teachers complete weekly family outreach in order to update on child's progress and overall well being in the school. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Based on information gathered from the Community School Forum, the Community School Director will recruit potential parent leaders to join the Community School Team for the 2018-2019 SY. The parent coordinator will recruit class parents for each homeroom as well as the Parent's Association. The school will ask current parent members of the SLT and CST to continue their services and encourage others to participate as well. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? In addition to regularly scheduled parent-teacher conferences, teachers will participate in weekly teacher-parent communication via phone, as well as monthly family engagement nights to encourage parent participation and engagement with teachers. Introductory workshops to each content area are facilitated by each content liaison as well as a Skedula tutorial. Skedula will be utilized by parents throughout the school year to track their child's progress academically and behaviorally. Lastly, a host of topical workshops are provided by the Parent Coordinator, CBO staff, as well as community partner providers. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 45  Type of Support Rationale Regular parent workshops facilitated by Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselors, and teachers for 8th grade parents regarding transition to HS, as well as an introductory workshop to core subject areas (ELA, Math, Science, SS). Class parents for each homeroom to collaborate and communicate with other parents in their child's homeroom about school programming as well as with the teacher regularly. Monthly family nights at the school to encourage family participation in addition to student-led parent teacher conferences. Both parents and 8th grade students will be engaged in the HS application and transition process. The clinic bilingual social worker will also run support groups for classes and small groups of 8th graders regarding this transition process. Content liaisons also provide pertinent information regarding curriculum across all grades to all parents during the Fall. Parents and families will use each other collaboratively along with the teachers in order to support student progress both academically and social- emotionally. Class parents will also create open dialogue amongst parents and the homeroom teachers to clarify required homework to be done, upcoming events, etc. Monthly family nights allow for families and the school to participate in activities and community building together. Conferences allow for students and parents to take an active role in the learning process and facilitate open and ongoing conversations with teachers. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Parent workshops led by Parent Coordinator, weekly phone calls by teachers during designated parent outreach time, SLT meetings, parent teacher conferences, summer home visits, monthly family nights. Family partnerships with CBO: Home visiting, Parenting Journey Group, school meetings with teachers and other school/CBOpersonnel to discuss child's progress, Community School Team, monthly family nights. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes, there are multiple spaces throughout the building for partnerships to be built. The parent coordinator's office is located on the first floor and is very easily accessible to parents and community members. The WedikoOffices are locatedon the fifth floor and lower mezzanine. Having two offices allows Wedikoto provide families with ongoing support. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? The Parent Coordinator and CSD will determine a schedule of workshops for SY 2018-2019 and CSD will leverage community resources in order to increase access and information regarding adult education classes within the community and at the school. The school will make every attempt to bring community resources supporting adult education in to the actual school building. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 46  Parent-teacher conferences, information on Skedula/PupilPath, New Visions Heat Map data sorter to track data and attendance trends. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, MS 363 will continue to develop and encourage partnerships with families and stakeholders through year long activities that will be measured by a 10% increase in attendance at all parent functions/family nights. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve: Attendance Improvement Strong Family-Community Ties Collaborative Teachers Attendance Strong Family Community Ties Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 47  Part 4 – Action Plan Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Student families Strong Family Community Ties September 2018-June 2019 School Administrative Team, Parents Association, Wediko, PBIS, School Leadership Team, and the Community School Team Strong Family Community Ties September 2018-June 2019 School Administrative Team, Parents Association, PBIS and School Leadership Team. Parents and guardians of the school’s students. To facilitate the increase of monthly family school events, we intend to determine parent interest through collaborating with the Parent Coordinator, the School Leadership Team, and Community School Team. Parents will take surveys created by Parent Coordinator and CBO to ascertain specific parent needs. This open communication will engender trust and a sense of belonging when the school provides activities and events that are a result of parent intent and as a result, model positive and engaging family interactions Increase parent enrollment in Skedula with ongoing opportunities throughout the school year for parents to enroll. These opportunities will occur during each parent -teacher night, and during the scheduled monthly family events mentioned above. Family members will participate in literacy events specific to their How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) increase in parent engagement in a wide range of activities. Strong trust amongst families and the school to support the entire family. There will be an increase of parents enrolled in Skedula. Parents will be more integrated in to the daily work of the students through online access to their child's progress. Families will 2018-19 RSCEP-R 48  social and cultural knowledge. This could take different forms and be included in different classes. For example, in English/language arts, families could enhance students’ learning by contributing ideas related to poetry, folk tales, music, or family customs. They could participate in social studies through talks or sharing artifacts related to the history of the local community’s evolution through generations. Educators in the classroom could connect parent contributions to common core expectations related to reading comprehension through follow-up literacy-based activities The school safety officers who are part of the school community will have an opportunity to review and make suggestions on the school safety policies and procedures. This will happen in advance of sharing school safety information with students and families. Further, school safety officers will be invited to take an active role alongside school administration and staff in explaining the procedures to students and families during assemblies or school/community events. School safety officers will co-present with staff information to students regarding fire evacuation, soft and hard Students, students’ parents. Strong Family Community Ties September 2018-June 2019 School Administrative Team, Safety Officers, building Safety/BRT team also have the opportunity to explore and engage classrooms with their own cultural and social knowledge as it relates back to the curriculum through literacy or social studies. The school will hold an annual safety meeting for parents to express concerns and remain aware of safety measures that take place within the building. CBO staff will facilitate a Restorative Justice training for school safety officers and other members of the Safety/BRT team throughout the building. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 49 Students, students’ parents. Strong Family Community Ties September 2018-June 2019 School Administrative Team, Teachers, CBO staff Increased communication between parents and teachers during regularly scheduled parent outreach time to discuss lock-down protocols, and school customs for visiting the building and school community. School safety officers could also explain their role in managing the environment and school grounds during the school day . To support clear communication about students’ academic progress, school educators reserve weekly in-service time after the end of the school day to conduct outreach to the families of students in their homeroom and academic rosters. Teachers make phone calls to share student successes with families and to notify parents/guardians of academic concerns as needed. Teachers dedicate a minimum of 15 minutes each week to family outreach. In addition, educators schedule more time to contact families where there is an ongoing need for student support through school-to-family communication. Moreover, students receiving specific services within the regular school day receive further communication from staff who provide those services as agreed upon by the student service team of teachers and the student caregivers Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 RSCEP-R 50  Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Focused Monthly Events Per Session for Staff Training Per Diem OTPS Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By administering the Wediko Needs assessment survey by February 2019 we will see an improvement of 10% in our parent attendance for parent teacher conferences. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Needs Assessment Survey, School Learning Environment Survey Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 51  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, MS 363 will service 45% of the student population during a one hour morning program and 100% of the student population during after school, servicing 100% of the population, which will result in a 4 point increase in Performance Index on both the ELA and Math State exams administered in April 2019.. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. NA Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 52   How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? The program will meet from 7:15am-8:15am every morning, Tuesday through Thursday and will focus on at risk students or 45% of the student population and then again will the entire student population from 2:40pm -3:40pm on Wednesday, and Thursday offering students 6 hours in total. Friday afternoon ELT structure will consist of CBO led enrichment activities, included but not limited to dance, music production, robotics and video coding. The activities will range from comprehension skills in both ELA and Math along with integration of Science and Social Studies. An Advisory component will be added to meet the social and emotional needs of the students. Outreach to families will begin on July 31 and August 1 with our annual home visits followed by orientation on August 29, 2018. All PD offered will service the academic and social/emotional component. The students will have the opportunity to gain intervention skills as well as enrichment with the focus on academics followed by social emotional learning. The Community Based Organization as well as the staff of 363 will work in conjunction to provide well above the mandated 5 ELT hours for the entire student population. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. ● Classroom teachers 5 hours per week to 100 students in the morning and 500 students in the afternoon ● Principal, Assistant Principal, Classroom Teacher, 21st Century ● CBO Wediko ● Evaluation by baseline, midline assessments and Lexile levels as well as attendance data Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Starting September 2018 ending June 2019 Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Community School Grant ELT funding for staff during am and pm program Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 53  X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks Attendance rates for ELT (mornings) and Lexile Levels given three times throughout the school year will show an increase of 25% each time monitored. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. IReady, Classroom Assessments, Ready Mock Exam Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 54  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, Wediko and other supporting community based organizations will collaborate and coordinate with school to address the needs of our lowest 10% academically performing students with the highest social and emotional needs ( based on the A.C.E. (Adverse Child Experience) survey,) which will result in an increase of .04 points on the average Math proficiency and .07 on the average ELA proficiency as measured by the NYS ELA and Math Exams. By June of 2019, through direct outreach efforts and professional development provided by the Wediko team on parent engagement for school staff, parent involvement will increase as measured by an increase of 8 points to a score of 65 on the Strong Family and Community data gathered from the NYC DOE learning environment survey. By June 2019, MS 363 will have an average of 60% or higher parent/guardian attendance rate for our four parent teacher conferences, during which student'’s academic progress will be reviewed, including iready data in the November and May conferences By June 2019, 90% of parents/guardians will register, make a profile, and utilize Skedula to monitor student progress. By June 2019, all students will be introduced and have access to the school’s diverse extracurricular activity program taking place during Extended Learning Time periods and after school hours which will result in sustaining or exceeding the supportive environment target. By June 2019, Success Mentors will create and implement attendance improvement plans for all students who were severely chronically absent and chronically absent during the 2017-2018 school year which will result in a 10% reduction of the chronic absenteeism rate. By June 2019, all MS 363 families will have reviewed their child’s academic progress at least twice through iready data with their content teacher during Parent teacher conferences in October and May. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 55  By June 2019, all students will have regular access to peer mediation services when necessary, resulting in a 15% decrease of OORS reports and ISS. By June of 2019, 100% of parents/guardians will have received meaningful outreach from the Wediko and the school staff team including phone calls, home visits and referrals to resources (including help enrolling in public entitlement programs) as measured by sustaining or increasing the benchmark for strong family and community ties. By June of 2019, Wediko will support advisory programming and Expanded Learning Time program during the school day as well as after school hours, which provides all students with access to the Renewal hour of academic instruction taught by DOE teachers, and a selection of enrichment activities. 90% of the students will participate in the ELT program on a regular basis, demonstrated by average monthly attendance in the ELT program Tuesday through Friday staying above 80% as measured by daily sign-in sheets. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? Strong Family-Community Ties benchmark will be maintained or improve. Attendance- reduction in chronic absenteeism rate Supportive Environment Effective Leadership Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Wediko Children's Services all students and families Individual/small group counseling, classroom social emotional learning and academic support, attendance team support, PBIS, advisory 21st Century selected students after school programming, literacy Morris Heights Health Center targeted students Enact selected students Physical, reproductive, and mental health counseling services for targeted students Attendance improvement, social emotional learning Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead 2018-19 RSCEP-R 56  2. 3. 4. implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. By paying attention to school climate and to the school as a holistic environment, community schools are valuable because they become more than the sum of their individual components. Certainly our vision is to offer a wide selection of programs for students and their families, but our real goal is to create a community school where all the pieces interact with one another, every day to create a safety net that can support not only the students, families and staff, but the surrounding community in making progress towards healthier and happier living. Wediko’s vision for community schools begins by creating a collaborative plan with the school leadership team, setting goals and priorities, identifying outcomes and processes, and identifying individual and team strengths of all involved. Wediko will work with the school and community to identify local resources and programs to be brought into the school. Currently, Wediko collaborates with the following resources and non-profits: Morris Heights Health Center, Ivy Child International, Sports & Arts Foundation, ENACT Inc., Inwood House, Vision Education and Media, Building Beats, and Dance to Unite, among many others. Wediko programs are known for supporting not just specific students, but supporting the milieu itself, being present throughout the school day in all areas of the school. This type of integration of social and emotional support allows for the development of a school-wide language and culture of shared expectations, and removes some of the barrier of distrust that is created when “outside experts” come in to offer advice. Wediko staff struggle alongside school staff to support students where they need it the most - in the cafeteria, hallways, classrooms, and after-school and in doing so, they demonstrate their commitment to helping the whole system succeed. Services are seamlessly integrated into the school day and allow for capacity-building of school staff. In addition to providing professional development for school staff on strategies to engage disengaged youth, Wediko is an active participant in development and implementation of advisory sessions in many of our partner schools and support both students and teachers through our Side by Side™ social skills co-teaching residencies. Community partners will be invited to hold workshops on relevant topics in-school, after-school, and on Saturdays for students, staff, and their families. These workshops will include information that can assist families and the school in removing barriers to success for students and families (including topics such as legal/immigration information, special education advocacy, arts-based activities, medical information sessions, social and emotional skill-building, food and nutrition, etc.). 2018-19 RSCEP-R 57  Students take a survey on social skills and problem behaviors at the beginning and end of the year (SSIS-RS; 15 mins). In the middle of the school year, students sit with counselors and fill out a short questionnaire on past adverse experiences and talk about ways to build resiliency (ACE Questionnaire; e.g. learning from mistakes, developing problem solving skills, etc.). Based on these assessments, Wediko clinicians will tailor interventions through individual and small group counseling, as well as family support through outside referrals, phone calls home, and home visits. Additionally, Wediko supports instructional time in classrooms in order to develop relationships with students and teachers and support students through small group work or specific social emotional needs in the classroom. Furthermore, all students are grouped based on their iready assessment data during ELT. for the 2017-2018 school year, iready and item analysis from the 2016-2017 school year will be implemented to drive instruction and social emotional needs. Mondays during ELT will be CBO lead, providing a variety of extracurricular and enrichment activities in partnership with multiple organizations already in place at the school, as well as outside agency partnerships. In addition to monthly family events hosted by the School Leadership Team (SLT), the Community School Director and a Wediko Clinician will hold two 12-week sessions of Parenting Journey, a group for caregivers to explore their own childhood experiences and how this impacts their role with their child today, as well as goal setting and self-care practices. Wediko and MS 363 have recently partnered with the Bronx Office of Adult Continuing Education in order to provide two ESL courses for approximately 50 students. The administration at MS 363 has already done an excellent job building a network of social emotional supports for students and staff, but there remains room for improvement in terms of coordination of services, and communication among various providers about optimizing academic and social emotional outcomes. There are strong relationships (since the school was founded) with three major partner CBO's and a school-based health clinic. Community School Team and School Leadership team meetings will take place once per month in order to collaborate and communicate around overall school goals. All CBO partners will attend. Additionally, the school will host monthly family nights for all community members and hold a Community Forum in May 2018. Additionally, Wediko clinicians will hold Parenting Journey groups open for all parents. The parent coordinator will continue to host regular parent workshops focused on academics. The school will continue to host Adult Education programming, offering two ESL courses. The Principal and CSD will meet weekly with Wediko NY Program Director as well as the DSR. CSD will participate in the weekly instructional support team meetings with all school administrators in addition to Master and Lead teachers. Using the datawise protocol, the team will utilize multiple data tools including the New Visions Data Sorter and Heat Map. In addition, the CSD and Assistant Principal will utilize the Heat Map during weekly attendance meetings to explore overall trends and problem solve individual student needs. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 58  Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students 1. Name and Scope of involvement of all community partners Wediko (Partner since 2011)- As lead CBO of the Community School, Wediko has a staff team of clinicians and counselors to support: · Side-by-Side™ weekly social skills groups and teacher consultation sessions · Individual and group counseling · Parent/family outreach, support & workshops · Attendance Outreach ELT MHHC (Partner since 2010)- Morris Heights Health Center School Based Health Clinic provides comprehensive primary, preventative and continuing health and mental health care. Services include: · Adolescent Health Care · Preventative Care · On-site health and mental health treatment ELT 2018-19 RSCEP-R 59  ENACT (school partner since 2010) Enact’s unique method of interactive theater and drama therapy techniques engage vulnerable youth to help them recognize and overcome obstacles standing in the way of success. Services include: · Providing drama therapy in classrooms in collaboration with teachers Parent workshops · Offer milieu and individualized attendance support · After school programming (ShowUp! And Drama Club) ELT Other ELT providers include: Building Beats (partner since 2015) Dance to Unite (partner since 2015) Yoga and mindfulness through Ivy Child International and Urban Yoga Foundation (partner since 2016) Vision Education Media (partner since 2016) The school also hosts a weekly food pantry sponsored by Power, Praise, Deliverance Community Church 3 Focus Areas for CSD: coordination of all CBO partnerships campus initiatives management and supervision of Wediko clinicians and counselors implementation of datawise protocol attendance 2) All stakeholders of the Community School Team will participate in the monthly team meetings. Meetings will be structured such that all stakeholders will be able to create a shared vision of the Community School and develop a strong understanding of the 2018-2019 RSCEP goals to support all aspects of the school community. Each stakeholder will provide regular, ongoing updates about the work they are doing as well as exploring ways to incorporate the overall instructional focus of the school for 2018-2019 school year. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 60  Members of the Community School team: -CSD -Wediko staff member -Principal -SLT Chair -UFT Chair -teachers -parent leaders - 2 students -family worker 3) The school is currently implementing Datawise practices into all meetings and areas of the school. Every meeting , including CBO partner meetings as well as Community School team meetings will include the datawise norms adopted by the school. Data such as iready assessments and state test scores will be used to adhere to the RSCEP goals. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. TIME: the collaboration required to create a community school will require additional time for various parties to meet to make decisions and to communicate about student needs and strategies to meet those needs. SPACE: Wediko Children’s Services will need an office space large enough to accommodate a staff of 4-5 full-time people and additional space to meet with students and families for private counseling and consultation sessions. Currently when space is tight these meetings happen in the auditorium or cafeteria or library but if possible a dedicated counseling office would be ideal. STAFF: Staff will be required to provide ELT programming to meet the needs of 600 students, 5 days/week. SCHEDULE: Current after school programs will have to start an hour later than they do at the moment. In order to bridge school with after school, several after school staff should have a schedule that begins about 10 am and ends about 6 pm. Wediko: Human Resources Needed: Wediko will have on site 5 days a week the CSD and Advocate Counselor 2018-19 RSCEP-R 61  2 or 3 days a week: 3-4 clinician/consultant level people Instructional Resources: Wediko will utilize school resources such as classroom space and use resources to purchase student supplies and activities as allocated through the Community School budget Schedule Adjustments: All teachers are required to participate in PDs every Monday. As a result, all students not participating in the Prime Leaders program will participate in activities led by Wediko staff as well as CBO subcontractors through the 21st Century Learning Center grant as well as the school budget. MHHC: Human Resources Needed: MHHC will staff a PA, Nurse Assistant, and Licensed bilingual Social Worker in the clinic 5 days a week full time Instructional Resources Resources will be provided by the clinic, CBO, or school as necessary Schedule Adjustments: During Extended Learning Time on Mondays, the social worker will participate in ELT by holding groups with select students ENACT: Human Resources Needed: Enact will have a full time Program Coordinator on site 5 days/week to support classroom push ins as well as after school programming. Additionally, there will be a DOE support staff present to support all Enact programming in the school. Instructional Resources: Resources will be purchased through Enact as necessary. Schedule Adjustments: The weekly after school program, ShowUp! Will be held on Mondays during the Extended Learning Time Hour. Other ELT providers: Building Beats, Dance to Unite, Ivy Child International/Urban Yoga Foundation, Vision Education Media. CBO partners will be funded through the 21st Century Learning Center grant or the school will provide service agreements to pay for provided services. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. The following is a brief outline of our intended timeline for implementation and completion: 1. Learn from Past Experiences: It is essential to both honor best practices and understand past failures in order to develop a comprehensive, culturally-competent strategy. This information could come from a variety of sources including staff, student, and parent focus groups, individual interviews of key community members, classroom and community observations, participation in staff development opportunities and meetings. Wediko staff will also 2018-19 RSCEP-R 62  participate in the school-based support team, attendance team meeting, and other relevant groups to gain perspective on the norms and needs of the community. (May and June 2019) 2. Further Develop a Representative, Collaborative Leadership Team: A well-developed team is essential in order to create a robust and resource-abundant environment for students and their families. The team, made up of members of all stakeholder groups in the school and community, gives voice to students, parents, school staff, and community partners in order to foster a school culture of and belonging and mutual support. Stakeholders include educators, students, other school staff, parents and caregivers, funders, community members, community partners, and local policymakers. Set up initial meetings with this leadership team. (June, July & August) 4. Enhance Staff Support and Professional Development: Wediko will provide comprehensive support of school staff to allow for a stronger social emotional component and, therefore, instructional program. This would include all of the following components: (1) Individualized collaborative case conferencing, providing insight on social and mental health issues that students and their families may be facing and strategies to utilize trauma-informed practices and (2) Ongoing Professional Development workshop series in which school staff explore the social, emotional, and behavioral needs of the school’s population, and in which they will learn practical, relevant strategies to use in the classroom. (May and June 2019) 5. Increase Opportunities for Parent and family engagement: Wediko staff will work to develop culturally appropriate, trusting relationship with families based on our support of them as well as their children through the following strategies: (1) Extensive positive parent outreach, which can include in-person meetings at the school, home visits, phone contact, and focus groups, (2) Initial introductory family events, possibly including parent workshops on topics relevant to them in removing social and emotional barriers to success, or social/recreational community-building events that allow parents to gain support from each other, and (3) Plan to develop a space in the school in which parents are welcome and may come to learn about community resources for themselves as well as their children. We hope that through this center, families will develop a sense of belonging, and foster a culture of community school. (July and August 2019) 6. Plan to develop and expand learning opportunities: Wediko staff will learn about current offerings and plan for additional learning opportunities, including after school hours, Saturdays, and school breaks. This includes developing collaborative relationships with current providers, analyzing program strengths and identifying opportunities to improve on quality and variety of academic and extracurricular learning choices. Wediko will subcontract with additional partners as needed to provide the depth and breadth of programming that best meets the identified needs Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 63  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 1. Below a 70 in ELA course. 2. Below grade level on I-Readyexam. 3. Below a 2.5 on NYS exam. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group push in or small group pull out. During morning help, school day, or after school. I-Ready my-On Teacher’s College curriculum. (Programs and activities will focus on reading comprehension) Mathematics 1. Below a 70 in Math. 2. Below grade level on I-Ready exam. I-Ready my-On Big Brainz. 3. Below a 2.5 on NYS exam. Khan Academy Small group push in or small group pull out During morning help, school day, or after school. Science 1. Below a 70 in science. (Programs and activities will focus on reading comprehension) I-Ready my-On 2. Below grade level on I-Ready exam. Khan Academy 3. Below a 2.5 onNYSexam. (Programs and activities will focus on reading comprehension) Small group push in or small group pull out During morning help, school day, or after school. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 64 Social Studies 1. Below a 70 in S.S. I-Ready 2. Below grade level on I-Ready exam. my-On 3. Below a 2.5 onNYSexam. At risk services will be determined by referral during grade or content meetings. Teacher’s College curriculum. (Programs and activities will focus on reading comprehension At risk services will be determined by referral during grade or content meetings At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Small group push in or small group pull out During morning help, school day, or after school. At risk services will be determined by referral during grade or content meetings At risk services will be determined by referral during grade or content meetings 2018-19 RSCEP-R 65  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 74 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. CBO staff will facilitate a small support group for students in transitional housing along with supplies and materials provided by the CBO and school for STH. Basic emergency supplies include uniforms, school supplies, books, glasses, etc.) and other educational services ( counseling services and intervention programs) so that STH students have opportunities to progress academically. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 74 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 66  Supplies and Materials School trips Small group support Parent workshops Adult Education 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 RSCEP-R 67  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Partnership with the NYC Teaching Fellows Classroom Apprentice Program ● Partnership with NYU ASD NEST Program to engage all staff ● Professional Learning for the 18% non highly qualified staff. ● Use of the Open Market Transfer System to interview veteran, experienced teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Summer Curriculum Planning aligned to the CCLS ● Code-X and CMP workshops attend by content specific staff ● Monthly workshops offered for our ICT and NEST staff by NYU ASD NEST Program ● Creation of in school teacher teams and lab sites ● Weekly content teacher team meetings ● Mentors in place for all first and second year teachers Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 2018-19 RSCEP-R 68  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Professional Development aligned the Danielson Framework for Teaching focusing on a different domain each month ● In house baseline and mid line assessments created during the summer planning program in 2018 ● NYC performance assessments as dictated by the NYCDOE administered once in October and again in May 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 2018-19 RSCEP-R 69  Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 4237.00 na na na na na na Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) X na na na na na na na na na na na na na 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 70   Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 71  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Academy for Personal Leadership and Excellence in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students The Academy for Personal Leadership and Excellence will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 72  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 73  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Academy for Personal Leadership and Excellence in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA),), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 74  students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 75  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 RSCEP-R 76  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 77  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 75 2018-19 RSCEP-R 78  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: MS 363 will be using Title III LEP funds to create two distinct supplemental programs. The first session will be held Tuesdays and Thursdays beginning December 6, 2018 and ending January 19, 2019. The program will be from 3:40pm - 5:10pm on those days for a total of 1 1/2 hours x 12 days for a total of 18 hours. The program will be taught by four (4) highly qualified ENL/Bilingual teachers and one (1) ELA teacher with one (1) supervisor to oversee the program and its proper implementation and logistics. The program will focus on the following types of students; students who have scored Expanding (Advanced) for two (2) years straight on the 2015 NYSESLAT and 2016 NYSESLAT and on students who have scored in the Entering or Emerging levels on the NYSESLAT or NYSISTELL with a focus on their scores in all four language modalities. The first group which will comprise of the Expanding students will have a cyclical program which will focus on reading, inferring, writing and discussing complex texts. The students will work in two distinct groups and will each have one ENL teacher on each day and one content ELA teacher will rotate between the two groups, working alongside the ENL teachers. One group will work with the ELA teacher on Tuesdays and the other group on Thursdays. Most of these students are in our "04" classes which are Free-standing ENL classes and are assessed during the day using the Lightsail Reading program which calculates lexile levels. These students are also assessed periodically using Performance Series reading data as well as data attained from the Ready exams. The students will then be further divided by using these lexile levels and each group will work with an ENL teacher and , during the rotation, the content ELA teacher, who will be facilitating guided reading groups using a variety of leveled texts using various reading strategies which allow students to access complex texts through teacher led mini-lessons, think-alouds, read-alouds, guided reading groups and the Socratic seminar. The third teacher will facilitate literature circles using novels which compliment The "Collections" series which we use for the school's curriculum. We use the "Collections" series grades 6-9 and have had success during the day exposing the students to interesting challenging texts made accessible to them through using ENL strategies which they have used during the guided reading portion of the program. We are currently looking at various titles which compliment the series at varying lexile levels which not only align themselves to the series and curriculum but also provide the rich text discussions we want our students to have and be exposed to. In order to push these Expanding student to the Commanding level, we need to provide them with opportunities to be exposed to text discussions which provide grade level and above grade level vocabulary, discussions that encompass the Depths of Knowledge, rigorous reading, writing, listening and speaking tasks as well. The students will be exposed to all of these elements in the various state assessments they have to show mastery of. Teachers will have time to co-plan on Tuesday afternoons from 2:40-3:15 as a component of their "Other Professional Work" responsibilities, which is built into the weekly schedule. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 79  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information For The Entering/Emerging groups, which will primarily consist of new comers/recently arrived students and those who had those scores on the NYSESLAT or NYSISTELL and are mostly in our "01" classes which are our Bilingual classes, we intend to continue using Practice Exercises in Basic English Levels D, E and possibly F. This series is designed for ELLs who need extra support in basic grammar usage and word study skills. The exercises are aligned to the Common Core State Standards. The series uses single skill focus for remediation and intervention with a mini-lesson which includes examples and/or reminders to introduce each lesson. Also, the skills are repeated in a variety of formats so students learn and can retain information with reviews presented throughout the lesson and at the end for reinforcement. Since the students using the Practice English in Basic English range from the very low beginning to the beginning we determined it would be best to start with the fourth grade text and gradually move into the fifth and possibly sixth grade texts. Although the texts are low level, they are still high interest and the students will be engaged. The book we intend to read in our Professional Development component will help compliment our incorporation of strategies with these students since it focuses on skills effective readers and writers need to know such as reading readiness/phonemic awareness; phonics and decoding; fluency; vocabulary and word recognition; comprehension; and higher-order thinking. The second session will begin on February 28, 2019 and go to April 6, 2019. This program will also be on Tuesdays and Thursdays during the same times of 3:40 - 5:10pm for 1 1/2 hours x 10 days for a total of 15 hours. For this program we will be using Finish Line New York ELLs which prepares students for the NYSESLAT by giving them practice in listening, reading, writing and speaking on grade level as they will be assessed by the NYSESLAT. This program allows the students to familiarize themselves with the NYSESLAT therefore; the students will be divided by grade levels and the ENL teacher teaching the class will scaffold the lessons to meet the needs of the students at the varying levels. This program will be taught by three (3) ENL teachers, one per grade level and then one (1) administrator will be needed to oversee the programming and logistics as well as provide any support that maybe needed such as even pulling out groups of students who may need additional support. The supervisor will assist by creating units of study as well as assist students with direct instruction with a focus on working individually with students who are not Spanish or English speaking and need direct instruction working with basic English vocabulary. There are no other supplementary programs offered at the school and therefore, supervision offered by Title III is needed. We hope that by providing this exposure to the NYSESLAT the students will be able to perform better and at least move one to two proficiency levels. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Begin description here: For the Professional Development portion, Title III funds will be used for a teacher study group, This group will meet on Friday mornings from 7:40 - 8:25 am for 45 minutes x 7 sessions and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 80  Part C: Professional Development will be facilitated by the ENL Lead Teacher and in conjunction with the ENL Coordinator/Administrator. The book we decided to use this year is "The Threads of Reading: Strategies for Literacy Development." The book describes the six foundational "threads" that students need to study in order to become effective readers: phonemic awareness, phonics and decoding, vocabulary, fluency, comprehension, and higher-order processing. For each area, Karen Tankersley, the author, explains how students acquire the reading skills they need and offers a series of skill-building strategies and activities that teachers can use in the classroom. It also addresses key questions about literacy such as: What makes a difference in reading achievement? How much reading time is enough? How can teachers use writing to build reading skills? How can teachers help students make meaning from their reading? The author believes that "reading is a complex process made up of several interlocking skills and processes." The book presents research and many ideas for how skillful literacy and content-area teachers can structure the classroom environment to strengthen each aforementioned thread. "The most effective teachers continue to demonstrate that effective literacy instruction is a balance of explicit teaching as well as holistic reading and writing experiences that, when combined, produce more capable readers." The belief of the author and how she sets up her book coincides with our cyclical foci with the Expanding group during the After school program. The hope is that after interacting with this book both ENL and content-area teachers will be able to create and engage the students in lessons that are well-rounded and incorporate the six threads or at least three of the six threads at a time, although it is suggested not to teach them in isolation. In order to support each other in this process there will be inter-visitations where first the teachers meet to discuss the lesson to be taught then an observation of the lesson and finally a debrief in which they can discuss the lesson. At the end of the observations we will all come together to discuss the lessons, strategies used and how they worked or didn't work. At the end of the year the group will meet again and discuss if they saw any growth/improvement in at least 75% of their students reading and writing. One of the great things about this book is that it includes research proven strategies and techniques the teachers can use for all grade levels. The purpose is to lessen the reading gap that many children come from elementary school into middle and high school. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: 2018-19 RSCEP-R 81  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Since our Family ENL program has been successful, we have decided to continue with the program this year as well. The Family ENL program will be on Saturdays for 8 sessions beginning on January 12, 2019 through March 2, 2019 from 10:00 am 12:00 pm for a total of 16 hours. We will invite the parents of our newcomers and beginning level ELLs, their middle school children, and younger siblings to take part in each session together. Parents will be called by teachers during Parent Outreach on Tuesdays afternoons from 3:15-3:40 as well as by the Parent Coordinator and formally invited to attend family sessions. We will also mail home a survey in November to gauge parent interest. The parents and middle school children will learn and work together side by side using Pearson Longman's series Side by Side; an all skills program integrating conversation practice, reading, writing and listening in a fun and easy format that has proven to be successful. The program will provide the parents and their middle school child with a vocabulary preview in every chapter along with pronunciation exercises to provide models for practicing authentic pronunciation, stress and intonation. At the same time, the younger siblings will be immersed in an early literacy program through read alouds, engaging language building exercises, and sight word recognition activities by a certified ESL teacher and a content area teacher with early childhood certification. Based on feedback from parents and the parent coordinator, many parents have not taken advantage of the parent ESL classes offered in the past because they have young children at home. This is why we decided to offer an opportunity for parents, middle school children, and their younger siblings to take part in a language building program together. This program will be taught by (3) highly qualified and certified ESL / Bilingual teachers, a content area teacher with early childhood certification, and a supervisor will be needed due to the time and dates of the program. For the parents and students who participated in the program last year we will be purchasing the materials for the next level of Side by Side and supplementing it with Rosetta Stone which has proven to be successful in the past. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 82  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-R 83  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Acad. for Persnl Leadership & Excellence Borough Bronx School Number 363 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Angelo Ledda Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Taylor Strack Teacher/Subject Area Dominga Lopez ENL / HLA Teacher/Subject Area Maurice Childs / ENL Related-Service Provider Yvette Ramos Speech Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Abby Falberg Coach School Counselor Gisela Bravo Parent Parent Coordinator Tamara Rosado Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 2 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 8 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program 3 Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-R 84  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 562 Total number of ELLs 191 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 33.99% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2010 K 1 4 3 2 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess early literacy skills of our ELL students in ELA, this past Academic Year 2017-2018, we will use I-Ready reading diagnostic data as a Fall and Winter benchmark, and our Spring data will be used as a post assessment. What it showed us was an approximate 10% increase in reading skills for our ELLs between the fall and winter diagnostics although when compared to the NYSESLAT we noticed they corresponded since many of our Newcomers scored at the Entering level although we had a large number of Expanding students. Unfortunately many of our newly arrived ELLs come with very low literacy skills in their Native language and those students are our TBE students. We know that without strong NL skills, its hard to transfer the skills to the New Language. We are looking at giving the ELL Periodic Assessment this year since we have never given it in the past along with ensuring all of the 2018-19 RSCEP-R 85  TBE students participate in the ELE to get better picture of how they are developing in the Native Language with the direct NLA instrucion they receive as part of the CR-Part 154 2. We are hoping with improved NLA performance, performance on the NYSESLAT, ELA, Ready, and I-Ready assessments will increase. This year the 6 th graders will be working with the MyOn program which give pre and post assessments and we can also monitor the 6 th graders Literacy skills even further. We always use school created baseline assessments to get an idea of where the students are starting and this was scored against a school created, school-wide rubric. The assessment showed that only 34 ELLs were above the 50th percentile in Multiple Choice and only 22 scored above the 50th percentile in the short response section. We provided all ENL students with a benchmark reading diagnostic. The results of this exam were as follows; class 604 (6th grade self-contained ENL class) out of 32 students tested, 0 were above level, 1 was on grade level and 25 students were below level; class 601 (6 th TBE) which consists of 24 6th graders were all below level; class 701 which consists of 33 7th grade students all were below grade level; class 704 (7th grade self-contained ENL class) which consists of 35 students 0 were ablove grade level, 1 was on grade level, while the other 34 were all below grade level ; class 801(8 th Grade TBE) consisting of 35 8 th Grade students all were below grade level; and finally, class 804 (8th grade self-contained ENL class) has 26 students and 2 students were on grade level while the remaining 24 were below level. What this preliminary data shows is that are ELLs are performing significantly below grade level and hence the reason why they continuously score Level 1 on the ELA; not only those students in the TBE classes but the ENL students as well. What the data has shown us is that we have to have a push in an increase on the types and qualities of differentiation and multiple entry points we are providing to make language accessible to our ELL students. It is also showing that we need to focus on student language proficiency and group the students homogeneously during certain points of the day to receive targeted language instruction. It is one of the reasons why we have taken another look at our curriculum, which was created by a diverse group of pedagogues over the last two summers, and are now requiring the incorporation of language objectives into every content area and class regardless if it is an ELL , SWD, ICT, or GE classroom. During content planning meetings we are looking at further materials or programs to enhance reading skills and have implemented Small Group Instruction into the ELA/ ENL curriculum in order to provide the students targeted reading instruction based on their unique and comprehensive I-Ready data profile reports. . We have also been using MyOn with the 6 th graders and have seen minimal progress but the progress was seen. Our ELL trends can be seen school wide and hence our heavy focus this year on implementing reading and writing in all classrooms whether it is music, art or physical education all students must be doing reading and writing and some form of mathematics. Thereby making instruction at MS 363 truly cross-curricular. Reading Comprehension is a focus school-wide this year as we have noticed it is an issue school wide and not only with our ELLs. Therefore we have implemented a DEAR (Drop Everything and Read) program in our school during certain periods of the day to improve focused reading and reading comprehension. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All teachers meet weekly in 40 minute grade level teams as well as 40 minute content area teams in which the ELA and ENL department combine as a group to analyze data and trends. . Co-Teachers also have common prep times at least one time during the day. During this time, teachers have the opportunity to work together to analyze data and trends and to create individual and class wide action plans for students. Through our PLC cycles, teachers have also worked together to plan units and assessments based on our school wide focus. Every teacher was provided a list of students who they teach with corresponding NYSESLAT levels and descriptions in order to plan and differentiate effectively for their ELLs and our first PLC cycle included sessions on the mandates of PArt 154 as well as the new language progressions so that all content area teachers who have access to understanding the scaffolds needed for ELL's at different levels of language acquisition. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? 2018-19 RSCEP-R 86  At the beginning of the school year the administration team looks at all of the ELL data available from local and state measures and using an Excel spread sheet similar to the EDAT Tool, but more user friendly, and chart trends between classes, grades and programs. We then use these charts and the trends they show to discuss curricular or pedagogical adaptations or changes. We have also placed a focus on our long term ELL's because they are not making adequate yearly progress as per the EDAT data. This group of students has been targeted for Title III services as a program separate from the program offered to Newcomer and SIFE students. After reviewing past NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data we have noticed the following trends: in regards to newcomers, we have noticed that those newcomers who have come from Spanish speaking countries, in our case 95% from the Dominican Republic, as well as students from Yeman, Egypt, and African countries tend to come with little or no prior exposure to the English language; therefore, scoring at the entering level of NYSITELL. Whereas those students who have come from Bangladesh, and Puerto Rico have either scored at the entering/emerging level on the NYSITELL and seem to have some if minor previous exposure to the English language in their native country. In grades 6, 7, and 8 all of the Spanish speaking Beginning students are in the TBE program whereas the Intermediate and Advanced students are primarily students from our Free- standing ENL classes or are ELL-SWDs who are in 12:1:1 classes or ICT settings. What this shows is that our free-standing self-contained ENL classes are having better results moving our students in language proficiency as per the NYSESLAT which directly correlates to the NYSITELL data. What this preliminary data shows is that our ELLs are performing significantly below level and hence the reason why they continuously score Level 1 on the ELA. What the data has shown us is that we have to have a push in increasing the types and qualities of scaffolding and differentiation we are providing to make language accessible to our ELL students. It is one of the reasons why we have taken another look at our curriculum which was created by a diverse group of pedagogues over the summer and are now are requiring the incorporation of language objectives into every content area and class regardless if it is an ELL , SWD or General Education classroom. During content planning meetings we are looking at further materials or programs to enhance reading skills and have implemented small group instruction periods into the weekly schedule based on student strengths and weaknesses on the comprehensive I-Ready individual student profile. Our ELL trends can be seen school wide and hence our heavy focus this year on implementing reading and writing in all classrooms whether it is music, art or physical education all students must be doing reading and writing and some form of mathematics. Thereby making instruction at MS 363 truly cross-curricular. A new school-wide initiative is that we have arranged for as many core content classes as possible to follow a Team Teaching model to assist with implementing the RTI model and assist we providing differentiation, teacher-student conferencing, and strategic group work. The teachers are expected to plan together for each lesson. In the case of the TBE and free-standing self-contained classes there is an appropriately certified, either ENL or Bilingual teacher along with a content specialist to assist the teacher in providing appropriate content instruction and the Bilingual/ENL teacher is there to assist with the scaffolding and differentiation. The General Education pedagogue also serves as another language model to our ELL students. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once NYSESLAT data has been analyzed, students are placed in their appropriate proficiency groups for ENL/ELA instruction. This allows teachers to provide targeted instruction based on language proficiency. Parallel programming allows groupings to be fluid, so that if students are showing progress on formative and summative assessments during the school year, students can be moved to the next proficiency level to recieve targeted instruction and to be further challenged. After initial I- Ready data has been collected, teachers and students analyze the individual comprehensive reports together and students are grouped on Thursdays for small group instruction based on strengths and weaknesses. Also, students are provided time 3 days per week to log into the I-Ready program to receive individualized lessons to assist in increasing lexile levels and reading comprehension scores. Students are then invited to apply for Title III or 21st Century programs for additional supplemental services. In addition, teachers have identified their CUSP students for the NYS ELA exam and have created individualized action plans for these students as well as inviting them to Saturday enrichment and February and April break academy in an attempt to raise NYSESLAT and ELA proficiency scores. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 87  5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. One thing we are realizing by reviewing our NYSESLAT and NYSITELL data is that many of our newcomer students come with no English and hence are scoring in the Entering level and many are coming with minimal exposure to English other than what they hear in the streets so they have BICS but little or no academic language. We do have a large number of Expanding students across the board which shows that between our Title III program and our general ENL and TBE programs there is some success. We had 24 Commanding students to add to the 22 Commanding students we already had in the building and are providing continuous services. A large portion of our ELLs are from the Dominican Republic and the trends are that many of them come with low Literacy skills in their Native Language as well. But the amount of Expanding ELLs is almost constant with our Entering due to the high number of new admits we consistently receive throughout the school year. Unfortunately our Long-term ELLs, many who are SWD are not making adequate yearly progress and we are putting them in more restricted Entering homogeneous but at the same time heterogeneous groupings since in one group level we all know there are many different levels. Many of our ENL students who start with us in 6 th grade by the time they reach 8 th grade are at the EX or CM levels and that can be seen by our NYSESLAT data. The TBE students fare a little lower but they show gains which as stated previously demonstrates that our ENL Literacy program is successful we just need to find ways to improve test scores and that can be done by extra ENL minutes throughout the school day and through the Title III programs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL curriculum has been created based on the New Language Progressions. This is to ensure that the curriculum has included scaffolds and differentiation for all English Language learners and that they receive a targeted, tailored curriculum based on their current language acquisition needs. This data allows us to determine how many proficiency groups are needed. This year, our 7th and 8th grade groups needed two classes of Expanding proficiency due to the high level of expanding students on the Spring 2017 NYSESLAT. Also, as a result of many newcomers arriving throughout the year, we have created a newcomer proficiency group which focuses on building basic language skills for social interaction prior to immersing them in academic language. We spend the first two weeks of school analyzing NYSESLAT data and baseline assessment data prior to placing the students in their proficiency grouping. This consists of ENL and ELA teachers as well as administrators. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. 7th and 8th grade ELL Students travel by homogeneous proficiency groups during period 2 and 3 M/W/F for 45 minute periods each day. On T/TH they receive one 45 minute period of ENL instruction. 6th grade ELLS travel as homogeneous groups for periods 7 and 8 M/W/F and period 7 on T/TH. During this time, entering, emerging, and transitioning students are grouped together and receive one period a day of standalone ENL, and one period every other day of Integrated ENL/ELA. Students in 601, 701, 801 ,604, 704, and 804 also receive additional intergrated ENL during social studies, math or science periods with one content area teacher and one ENL teacher as a co-teaching model. Expanding, and Commanding students travel by proficiency grouping during the same periods and are 2018-19 RSCEP-R 88  provided two 45 minute periods of Integrated ENL/ELA on M/W/F and one 45 min integrated ENL/ELA period on T/TH. For the remainder of the day, students in classes 604 and 704 have blocked scheduling, while the eighth graders follow an individualized program consisting of heterogeneous grouping for content classes. SWD who are also ELL students receive integrated and/or standalone ENL in accordance with Part 154 mandated minutes through a co-teaching model during one or more content area classes with a Special Education certified and ENL certified teacher. b. TBE program. If applicable. ELL Students travel by homogeneous proficiency groups during period 2 and 3 for 45 minute periods M/W/F and T/TH for one 45 Minute period, entering and emerging students receive one period a day of standalone ENL, and one period a day of Integrated ENL/ELA. Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students travel by proficiency and are provided two 45 minute periods a day of Integrated ENL/ELA and or an additional content area such as math, science, and social studies. For the remainder of the day, students in TBE classes 601, 701 follow blocked scheduling to ensure they are taught by bilingual certified content area teachers in math and science, as does class 801 with the exception of elective classes in which they are heterogeneously grouped. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ELL Students travel by homogenous proficiency groups during period 2 and 3 for 45 minute periods each day. During this time, entering and emerging students receive one period a day of standalone ENL, and one period a day of Integrated ENL/ELA. Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding students travel by proficiency and are provided two 45 minute periods a day of Integrated ENL/ELA and an additional content area such as math, science, or social studies.. In our TBE program HLA instruction is solely taught in the native language which is Spanish, by a highly qualified Bilingual teacher and a Foreign Language Spanish teacher in grades seven and eight. It is taught explicitly in the Native Language, Spanish, and the materials used are of high quality, grade appropriate and aligned with the CCLS. As our instructional periods school wide are 45 minutes long so students receive HLA 4 times a week for 4 periods for 45 minutes each period (one unit). Students receive integrated ELA instruction 5 times a week for 5 periods a week and the same is true for explicit ENL instruction. In order to ensure that the students receive the required amount of ENL instruction, ENL is also taught using strategies from the SIOP model utilizing Social Studies as the content focus and this is provided by a teacher with a BIlingual Extension and therefore is also highly qualified to teach ELLs. We follow the model required per CR-Part 154 for Entering and Emerging students which require the same amount of explicit ENL, ELA and NLA minutes. We also ensure that in our Freestanding ENL and TBE model, regardless of the language of instruction, both a content and language objective are presented and taught. For our push in (co-teaching) model, depending on the mandated minutes required by each student, the students recieve integrated ENL five, four, three, days a week or two days a week by a highly qualified TESOL teacher. Students requiring standalone minutes also receive these minutes from the same ENL provider. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In the TBE program most content area instruction is done in the Native Language, which is Spanish. For the students who are at an Expanding or Commanding level in the TBE class in Mathematics we provide them with the English book as well to expose them to the academic language of Math and for all the classes we purchased supplemental math workbooks which are scaffolded for ELLs and introduces academic language in an easily accessible way and is grade appropriate and CCLS aligned. By mid-year we expect all TBE classes to provide a review or re-cap of the lesson in English to begin to expose students slowly to academic language in the content area in English. In Social Studies, in the TBE model, we provide Reader's Theatre in English which is aligned to the curriculum to provide some exposure to content and content language in a scaffolded and differentiated way. As far as the actual text books are 2018-19 RSCEP-R 89  concerned, the students who are dominant in English are provided with English text books and those dominant in Spanish are provided with Spanish textbooks. Instruction for Social Studies is provided in Spanish and English with reliance on Native Language support, use of visual aides, graphic organziers, disctionaries (Spanish/English), peer tutoring with the students grouped for activities with both high and low level students together to assist one another. She also utilzes ENL strategies to provide support for those students who need the assistance. For Native Language Arts, in the TBE program, we purchased the Santillana USA programs Yabisí and En Español which is somewhat aligned to Code-X and aligned to the CCLS. In that way, the students are simultaneously learning the same strategies and skills in Spanish as they are in English in order to make connections and build upon knowledge in the Native Language to make the new knowledge in English accessible. Science is also done in English with Native Language support, in the TBE model, and adjusted as the teacher provides instruction. If she does a mini-lesson and realizes that the students are having difficulties grasping the content in English, she re-states the mini-lesson in Spanish to ensure comprehension. But, activities are differentiated for those students who are either English dominant or Spanish dominant. She provides the students with many hands-on activities which helps contextualize the concepts that may be new in English and as previously stated will provide assistance in the form of clarification in the Native Language. This program gradually increases English instruction, while steadily decreasing Native Language instruction as students develop English proficiency and literacy skills to eventually participate fully in all English content courses. This is accomplished utilizing ENL strategies such as: modeling, bridging, contextualizing, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognitive development. Each language is given equal attention when the teacher is planning lessons. Content terms, in Math, Science, and Social Studies are developed in English and their meaning clarified in the students’ native language. Students are provided with opportunities to use concept language in Math, Science and Social Studies, and to discuss in their own words in both the Native Language and English. It is also important to note that students are made accessible to first language books in the classroom library. They take part in a buddy system where beginners are paired with intermediates and they are invited to attend after school for further language development. Transitional Bilingual Program is designed so that students develop conceptual skills in their native language as they learn English. Instructional components are designed to develop skills in the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. This program gradually increases English instruction, while steadily decreasing Native Language instruction as students develop English proficiency and literacy skills to eventually participate fully in all English content courses. This is accomplished utilizing ENL strategies such as: modeling, bridging, contextualizing, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognitive development. Each language is given equal attention when the teacher is planning lessons. Content terms, in Math, Science, and Social Studies are developed in English and their meaning clarified in the students’ native language. Students are provided with opportunities to use concept language in Math, Science and Social Studies, and to discuss in their own words in both the Native Language and English. It is also important to note that students are made accessible to first language books in the classroom library. They take part in a buddy system where beginners are paired with intermediates and they are invited to attend after school for further language development. In the self-contained ENL classes all instruction is provided in English using strategies derived from the SIOP model. In the self-contained ENL certified teachers provide support for differentiation during instruction in the content areas. The students in the self-contained ENL program, as well as all the students in our school receive instruction through curriculum which is aligned to the CCLS and which was differentiated to meet the needs of the students. The majority of our students in the self-contained classes are Long-term ELLs who continuously score in the advanced level of the NYSESLAT. Those few students who speak low-incident languages also get pulled out separately a minimum of two times a week by the pull-out teacher to receive additional explicit standalone ENL instruction as is mandated per CR-Part 154. For ELA the students use Code-X and it is adapted to meet the linguistic needs of the students. The program provides academic content area instruction in English while making content specific terms accessible via ENL strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation and metacognitive development. In addition, scaffolding techniques are used extensively to assist students in achieving the appropriate English proficiency for their grade as well as prepare them to meet the CCLS. Content terms are 2018-19 RSCEP-R 90  developed in English and their meaning clarified utilizing the ENL strategies and methodologies listed above. As with the TBE program, students are made accessible to first language books in the classroom library. They take part in a buddy system where entering. emerging, transitioning are paired with expanding/commanding students and they are also invited to attend after school for further language development. In this school’s Freestanding, self-contained ENL program, each child in this setting receives instruction in English. The grouping is heterogeneous for ENL/ELA periods and homogeneous for the remainder of content classes. The program provides academic content area instruction in English while making content specific terms accessible via ENL strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation and metacognitive development. In addition, scaffolding techniques are used extensively to assist students in achieving the appropriate English proficiency for their grade as well as prepare them to meet CCLS. Content terms are developed in English and their meaning clarified utilizing the ENL strategies and methodologies listed above. As with the TBE program, students are made accessible to first language books in the classroom library. They take part in a buddy system where intermediates are paired with advanced students and they are also invited to attend after school for further language development. ENL naturally is provided in English as well as ELA, in the TBE model. For ELA the TBE program uses Code-X as well as a school created ENL curriculum which focuses on the development of language through the New Language Progressions, but the teacher ensures to provide scaffolding and differentiation of instruction based on both ELA and NYSESLAT levels and since she is also the NLA teacher she is able to provide any links between NLA and ELA so that the students can make those connections between the Native Language and English. For ENL the teacher uses a mixture of Code-X along with the ELL modifications that were created during curriculum development sessions in the summer when were were aligning the Core Curriculum to the needs of our students. She utilizes her knowledge of ENL strategies to make Code-X and all additional supplemental materials and resources accessible to all. In the standalone ENL program, since it is explicit ENL instruction is done utilizing Pearson Longman's Keystone series as well as Collections which we chose since it has similar design and layout as the Code-X used during ELA instruction. The materials used for ENL are CCLS aligned as well. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? For those students in the TBE program, for native language assessment we use various assessments. Academic Year 2012-2013 we created an assessment which follows a similar design to the NYSESLAT except in the native language, Spanish. This assessment was given mid-winter it was created by the Assistant Principal, who is not only a former NLA teacher but, also an ELL Instructional Support Specialist , with the assistance of the current NLA teacher. We felt that since this in-house created assessment tests the same modalities as the NYSESLAT in the native language, except it does not contain a speaking session, due to the difficulties for administration, it will give us a good idea of the students' native language development. The students are also given the school's created pre, mid and post-assessments in the native language for the various content areas. Naturally, where available they are also provided with every city and state assessment in the native language and if one is not available, as in the case of our students who speak low-incidence languages, we hire translators/interpreters to assist with testing. The assessments, in every content area, provide native language formative, ongoing, and summative assessments that gauge student understanding of the content being taught, utilizing the common core standards as anchors. The assessments are scored using a school wide rubric that measures the assimilation of content information in the students native language. Also, the students have the option to take the NYS Math exams in their Native Language to ensure that the content taught is being adequately assessed. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing 2018-19 RSCEP-R 91  d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Everything mentioned below for the specific sub-groups is in addition to the differentiated instruction they receive in their classrooms by licensed professional Bilingual and ENL teachers which is geared to make content accessible to the students in the native language, where applicable, and of course in English. Based on our renewal school co-interpretation and data review, we also found the need to group students in classes 601, 701, 801, 604, 704, and 804 for two periods a day by language proficiency level through parallel programming thus creating heterogeneous, flexible grouping to target the linguistic demands of each of 6 groups. The groups are titled Newcomer, Entering, Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding, and Commanding. For those two periods, students will be mixed grade levels with similar linguistic profiles ensuring that they receive their mandated freestanding ENL and integrated ENL/ELA minutes including above the mandated 90 minutes for our Commanding students (Former ELLs).. In previous years, we were awarded a SIFE grant to provide supplemental instruction to these students in both the Native Language and English. Once again we will apply for this grant and hope that it is awarded since it allowed us to focus explicitly on these students in small group settings with a focus on soci-emotional as well as educational development. During Extended Learning Time and the two periods a day of proficiency grouping we have students grouped based on a combination their ELA levels or NYSESLAT levels. We have ensured that SIFE students are grouped together and provided assistance by a certified ENL teacher with assistance from an ELA content teacher. Teachers of ELLs are informed of who are the SIFE students in their classes and are assisted through content area meetings and meetings with the Assistant Principal in charge of ELL instruction on creating approriate scaffold in their lessons to meet the needs of these students. These students are also targeted in Title III programs and are mandated to attend. SIFE students will be enrolled in either a TBE or Free-Standing ESL self-contained class where they will be instructed utilizing the below mentioned ENL methods and strategies in order to accelerate academic and language development. These include: modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation and metacognitive development. In addition, scaffolding techniques will be used extensively. Students will be made accessible to first language books in the classroom library. They will take part in a buddy system where SIFEs will be paired with more advanced students and they will also be invited to attend after school and Saturday enrichment programs for further language development. SIFE students will also take part in a pull out instructional period per day where they will be grouped by proficiency level and receive additional instruction to acclimate the students to the scholastic environment as well as provide them more intensive academic as well as social emotional support among their peer group. Former ELLs who were in the TBE program, after informing both the parent and student of passing the NYSESLAT, are placed in the self-contained ENL classes for their additional two years of service where they recieve well over the 90 minutes of integrated ENL per week. This way we are ensured that they continue to receive instruction that is scaffolded and differentiated to meet the needs of ELLs. The students are monitored by the teachers to see if these students are having difficulties with language usage and are put in groups according to their needs. Some of these students, in order to provide assistance in mathematics, attend a TBE mathematics class in which the instruction is primarily in English but provides support in the NL. We also invite and encourage the students to continue attending Title III classes which focus on discreet language instruction and the students are provided with both a pre and post assessment to monitor continued growth. Those F-ELLs who were already in the self-contained ENL class we keep them there for the aforementioned reasons of providing them with continued ESL support and scaffolds and they too are encouraged to participate in the Title III program. Mainly in the case of F-ELLs who were in the TBE program we have had to provide counseling for assisting them with the transition from a Bilingual program with NL support to an English only environment where NL support may not be as readily available. Our new-comers regardless of being enrolled in a TBE class or ENL class are afforded multiple opportunities before, during and after school to use our Technology Lab and practice English using the Rosetta Stone system and we have found it very beneficial and successful since the students are continuously engaged throughout the program. The students who have low-incidence languages, despite being in a self-contained ESL class, are additionally pulled out by the pull-out ESL a minimum of three times a week for additional explicit ESL instruction. Since most of these students are new immigrants, besides our Title III program they also are encouraged to attend the Immigrant Funds program which focuses primarily on language development but there is also a focus on acculturation. Transitional Bilingual Program is designed so that students develop conceptual skills in their native language as they learn English. Instructional components are designed to develop skills in the four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. Language and content instruction are accomplished utilizing ESL strategies such as: modeling, bridging, contextualizing, schema building, text re-presentation, and metacognitive development. An effort is made to give each native language equal attention when the teacher is planning lessons although 2018-19 RSCEP-R 92  this is more difficult with our low-incidence languages like Twi, Hausa, Arabic, Samoan, and Fulani. However, these students tend to have had previous exposure to English, though limited. Content terms are developed in English and their meaning clarified in the students’ native language. Students are provided with opportunities to use concept language and to discuss in their own words in both the native language and English. Students are made accessible to first language books in the classroom library. They take part in a buddy system where beginners are paired with intermediates and they are invited to attend after school and Saturday enrichment programs for further language development Most of our students who have been ELLs for 6 or more years (LTEs) are either SWDs or students who are native born. Many of those students who are SWDs are in self-contained and ICT classes and are reading at least three to four grades below level. These are also the students in the push in ENL program. The goals with these particular students is to provide them with high-interest low level texts with a focus on informational text. Also, since all of these SWDs take the state tests but are not held to promotional standards we have provided them with ENL materials very similar to the Code-X program used throughout the school but makes texts accessible through scaffolds and differentiation but exposes the students to the same skills and strategies as in Common Core Code-X. These students are also invited and encouraged to attend Title III in which we focus on linguistic and mathematical skills which will make content more accessible. This is all done keeping IEP goals in mind. ELLs that have received services for 4+ years are either enrolled in this school’s Freestanding, self-contained ENL program or self-contained special education classes which provides academic content area instruction in English while making content specific terms accessible via ENL strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation and metacognitive development that where applicable is aligned to the student’s IEPs. In addition, scaffolding techniques or ENL strategic instruction, are used extensively to assist students in achieving the appropriate English proficiency for their grade. Some of our 4+ years ELLs, as previously stated are mainly native born and are our most difficult group to reach. Most of their deficiencies are in Reading Comprehension despite the majority scoring advanced on the NYSESLAT, they continuously score Level 1s or 2 s on the ELA state assessment. These students are also the majority of students in our self-contained classes; therefore the focus in the differentiated groups in those classes is on various reading comprehension strategies such as inferences, deciphering main idea, using context clues, etc. One of our other goals is to expose them to various genres of literature to enhance their reading enjoyment. Another focus during all instruction is making content accessible through various scaffolding strategies and strategic RTI grouping through the use of our Team Teaching model which is the norm throughout the school. As with the TBE program, students are made accessible to first language books in the classroom library. They take part in a buddy system where intermediates are paired with advanced students and they are also invited to attend after school and Saturday enrichment programs for further language development. This group of ELL’s will take part in NYSESLAT enrichment courses in order to ensure that they become acclimated to the exam as well as strengthen any areas they struggle with to increase their abilities and assist them in scoring proficient on the NYSELSLAT. For Former ELL's, we ensure that they receive two years of services beyond exiting status for more than the mandated 90 minutes per week. The students who test-out are primarily those ELL's who later score level 3 and 4 on the NYS ELA exam. They are ELL's within the freestanding, self- contained ENL classes. These students will be included in the homogenous language proficiency grouping within the "Commanding" group. These students will receive the same curriculum as the general education population, but for ELA will receive integrated ENL/ELA with a certified ENL teacher and a certified ELA content teacher. Throughout the course of the two years, they will receive scaffolding which will be removed by the time they exit their two years additional service in order to be prepared to succeed in a general education non-ENL setting. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Aside from the students in our TBE and Freestanding ENL programs, the rest of our students who are ELL-SWDs are in a self-contained 12:1:1 class. All of these students are in monolingual English classess and are serviced for ESL using the pull-out model. All of our ELL-SWDs are reading three or more levels below grade level. The strategies used are dependent on the individual student's IEP goals many of which are to increase reading levels by at least one level which in some cases is 3rd or 4th grade level. These students are also many of our LTEs. Despite their IEPs staing they are reading considerably below grade level most of these students are advanced or intermediate in the NYSESLAT and only 1 student who has continuously scored in the beginning level. The students all use Code-X for ELA and Connected Math from the Core Curriculum. For ENL the push in teacher uses Pearson Longman's Keystone which is sufficiently aligned to Code-X to assist students in still learning the skills in strategies from Code-X but using materials which are specifically developed to meet their linguistic needs through embedded scaffolds. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 93  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our ELL-SWDs are in a self-contained class and therefore must follow block scheduling. Eighth grade students have individualized scheduling for their elective only. The students receive ENL in a push in model in groups no larger than 12 and are serviced by grade and proficiency level which gives them an opportunity to remain in their 12:1:1 environment with the addition of a certified ENL teacher. During ENL they use grade level materials which are aligned to the Code-X used in ELA. The self-contained teacher and para-professional meet with the ENL teacher for assistance in meeting linguistic needs while meeting their IEP goals. The instructional programs for ELL SWDs in the 12:1:1 program provides academic content area instruction in English while making content specific terms accessible via ESL strategies such as modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, text re-presentation and metacognitive development. In addition, scaffolding techniques or ENL strategic instruction, are used extensively to assist students in achieving the appropriate English proficiency for their grade as well as prepare them to meet and/or exceed the CCLS Using the technology programs, Destination Reading and Read 180, which offers practice in phonics, comprehension in text genres, etc., their teachers can assess and assign specific, grade appropropriate tasks that develop reading comprehension. Content terms are developed in English and their meaning clarified utilizing the ESL strategies and methodologies listed above. As with the TBE program, students are made accessible to first language books in the classroom library. They take part in a buddy system where beginners are paired with more advanced students and they are also invited to attend after school and Saturday enrichment programs for further language development. This group of ELL’s will take part in Title III NYSESLAT enrichment courses in order to ensure that they become acclimated to the exam as well as strengthen any areas they struggle with in order to increase their abilities and assist them in scoring proficient on the NYSELSLAT. ELL-SWD LRE: Students take part in a inter-grade buddy system where beginners are paired with more advanced students throughout the year and time is alotted through parellel teaching oppourtunities where SWD may mainstream into a general education ENL classroom in order to meet their diverse needs in the Least Restrictive Environment possible. ELL-SWD are also invited to attend after school and Saturday enrichment programs for further language development. Grouping is heterogeneous and thus the SWD participate in extra-curricular services in a LRE . 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. This school is currently implementing Response to Intervention which is a comprehensive, systematic approach to teaching and learning designed to address academic and behavioral areas of development for all students, including all level ELLs, through increasingly differentiated and intensified assessments and instruction. Throughout the content areas of ELA, math, social studies, and science, each instructor will continuously assess the level of understanding for each child, design quality and differentiated instruction according to the data available, implement the differentiation via ENL strategies and methodologies, and then reassess for understanding and document each student’s progress. Students will be grouped by tiered level (Entering and Emerging) and cycle through a 4 week program which will increase in complexity. Progress reports will be created via assessment data gathered from formative and summative assessments. This constant cycle will assist in providing the ENL and Bilingual team with consistent data, i.e. level of skills/performance indicator mastery, for each ELL child, in each subgroup serviced. For example, a newcomer receives an additional instructional period of targeted intervention instruction to support the ENL strategies implemented in class. The targeted interventions are also reinforced through enrichment programs offered during afterschool and Saturday programs. All interventions are offered in English and the students’ Native Language of Spanish. Also, the school will have specific small group AIS reading and math instruction offered to all students performing far below grade level standards using specific programs including the MYON reading program as well as Read 180. All ELL's also reviece the I-Ready reading program which tracks indepedndent lexile levels over the course of the year with comprehension questions aligned to the CCLS to track individual student growth over time. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Based on our renewal school co-interpretation data review and findings, we see a need to group students homogeneously by proficiency levels for two periods a day. The rationale is that it ensures that each student receives mandated ENL minutes as per CR Part 154 Requirements. Also, it allows us to target the distinct linguistic needs of students performing at each proficiency level while still providing access to the CCLS and providing multiple entry points into the curriculum for students performing at each proficiency level. The curriculum will be differentiated though consistent formative assessments 2018-19 RSCEP-R 94  incorporating the language progressions as well as Common Core Learning standards, while also addressing all four language modalities. It also provides fluidity within the proficiency levels so that students making consistent progress within a proficiency level can be moved to the next linguistically relevant class. Parallel programming will occur so that students can easily be moved to the next proficiency level without disruption to their learning. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We have discontinued the TBE Bridge Class model. This was discontinued at the start of the 2014-2015 school year. We felt that it was ineffective in ensuring that students were receiving the appropriate grade level content instruction especially in math, science, and social studies classes where there are distinct differences in the content standards. We currently offer and have the population for separate 6 th , 7 th and 8 th grade TBE classes (601, 701, 801). 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. During the school week, we offer a variety of acterschool activities in partnership with our CBO, Wedieko. All students, including ELLs are provided the opportunity to enroll in the afterschool program. During this time, students receive homework assistance and academic intervention services as well as recreational time where they have the option to join a variety of sports teams and clubs including, Robotics, Soccer, Flag Football, Girls and Boys Basketball Teams, Swimming, Robotice, Art , Drama, Zumba, Dance, Cheerleading, and Step Team. ELL students are also offered an opportunity to participate in the afterschool Title III program in which students are grouped by language proficiency and provided direct instuction by a certified ENL teacher in groups no larger than 10 students. Saturday enrichment services are offered in both language and provide an intensive 1 1/2 hours of ELA (Integrated ENL) instruction and 1 1/2 hours of math support. Our 8 th grade ELL students from classes 801 and 804 participate in Ballroom Dancing classes and 6 couples represent the school in a final competition in which our school has won gold and silver in city competitions. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Due to our high population of ELL students, we ensure that we have materials specific to the needs of our ELL population readily available for their use. Each ELL subgroup has access to resource materials in their native language to support the acquisition of English. Students use manipulative, interactive materials, and other instructional resources to assist in comprehension of content terms and content specific information that may not otherwise be understood. The ELL population has interactive esmart boards in all classrooms, and access to teachnology and computer stations including laptop carts, and the use of interactive educational programs on student i-pads and tablets including I-Ready independent reading and MYON in order to assist our school-wide goal of targeting reading comprehension in the 2015-2016 school year. We also have Rosetta Stone available in the technology lab for newcomer students to access throughout the day and during AIS periods as well as afterschool. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home Language Arts support in the TBE program is delivered to beginning, intermediate, and advanced students via a scheduled Home Language Arts (HLA) period for 45 Minutes 4 days a week. Seventh and Eighth grade TBE students are provided HLA instruction by a certified Spanish Foreign Language Teacher (LOTE). Students also receive HLA support throughout all content areas when the need arises and when the course is or is not being taught in the home language (Spanish). Students in the freestanding ENL program have access to texts and resource materials in their native language if possible and if necessary. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required service supports and resources are both age and grade level appropriate. All TBE classroom libraries have materials that are age appropriate and contain at least 40% of its material in the native language. All libraries and texts are leveled based on Lexile and Fountas and Pinell indicators to ensure that each child has access tp materials that are appropriate for their particular proficiency level. We also have high interest low level texts in all ELL classrooms as well as graphic novels which the students enjoy. The I-Ready Reading Program is also used by all ELA/ENL teachers in order to track individual students reading levels. . The comprehension questions asked by the program at check-in points ensuring reading are standards based and mirror the questioning level of common core assessments. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 95  15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Due to our high population of ELL students, we ensure that we have materials specific to the needs of our ELL population readily available for their use. Each ELL subgroup has access to resource materials in their native language to support the acquisition of English. Students use manipulatives, interactive materials, and other instructional resources to assist in comprehension of content terms and content specific information that may not otherwise be understood. The ELL population has interactive esmart boards in all classrooms, and access to teachnology and computer stations including laptop carts, and the use of interactive educational programs on student i-pads and tablets including I-Ready independent reading and MYON in order to assist our school-wide goal of targeting reading comprehension. We also have Rosetta Stone available in the technology lab for newcomer students to access throughout the day and during AIS periods as well as afterschool. Although we share the building with MS459, or library, and auditorium are shared spaces in which all students have access. Each school has their own ENL teachers and MS363 is the only school with a TBE program. As a renewal school MS363 has access to our CBO, Wediko, for social emotional support for our ELLs. MS363 and MS459 each have their own resources for English Language Learners. The only shared spaces are the library in which MS363 has access on T/TH and every other Friday, and the auditorium in which MS363 has access M/W and every other Friday. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year, licensed pedagogues including Mr. Lefebvre (ENL Teacher of Newcomer Proficiency Group) and Ms. Jimenez (Teacher of Entering Proficiency Group), conduct two open houses at the school and provide ELL information to the student population and their parents. This is organized by Ms. Strack the ENL Lead Teacher. Home visits are conducted in the summer as well in order to provide literature to new students and their families about the school and programs offered. Our parent coordinator, Ms. Tamara Rosado, also provides many parent activities and organizes events for new families in coordination with the ENL teachers, the CBO, and administration. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We currently offer drama as an elective opportunity for our ENL students, taught by a licensed TESOL teacher in order to target the four language modalities and provide the students another avenue for English language acquisition. During ELT, 8th grade students also have access to playwriting if they choose. All students in 8th grade take a Spanish class as a prerequisite for high school. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As part of the professional development all staff members (Principal, Assistant Principal, Teacher, Paraprofessionals, Secretary, Related Service Providers and Parent Coordinator), are entitled to have the opportunity to select from an array of workshops focused on increasing academic achievement among ELLs offered by OELL. All teachers are encouraged to attend OELL trainings and if one of the administrators sees a particular training which may be beneficial for a teacher he/she registers 2018-19 RSCEP-R 96  the teacher for that learning opportunity. Throughout the year, teachers are required to select two ENL workshops in areas they would like to improve upon. After attending respective workshops, staff members turnkey salient workshop content to staff during Professional Development Time as an opportunity to provide an In-House workshop to staff members. Teachers of ELLs also facilitate In-House workshops as well as open their classrooms as lab sites for school wide intervisits in order to model ELL best practices and scaffolding strategies to all content teachers. The current Assistant Principal in charge of ELL is a former ELL Instructional Support Specialist as well as a Certified QTEL Professional Developer and she provides the teachers with professional development or one to one assistance with lesson planning, scaffolding and differentiation strategies as well as trainings on incorporating language objectives into all lesson plans along with content objectives. Teacher Team meetings are included in this school’s professional development. Teacher Team meetings consist of all pedagogues and occur every Monday for 40 minutes. These meetings are an isolated, uninterrupted amount of time that are teacher lead and provide an opportunity for staff to gather, analyze and interpret student data. Staff members work with a highly qualified lead teacher who serves a dual role as an instructional coach to develop and cultivate the use of ELL strategies among staff to address the findings and conclusions drawn from the analysis of student data. In addition, teachers of ELLs use common planning time and content meetings to discuss, plan and assess instructional lessons as a means of strategically adjusting and differentiating instruction for ELL students. The ENL teacher and Bilingual teachers specifically focus on using students’ Native Language as a method to support comprehension in all content areas. All teachers have the opportunity to attend professional development opportunities provided by DELLS in engaging ELLs in the COmmon Core Learning Standards. All teachers of ELLs have also attended Teachers College Writing Workshops to incorporate this into our ELA/ENL curriculum. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school provides assistance to staff through an Inter-visitation system and a Transitional Program to assist ELL students as they transition from elementary to middle school. Our ELL teachers have opened their classrooms as lab-sites in order to foster thoughtful conversations about ELL scaffolds and Instruction and to assist teachers in incorporating such strategies into their own classrooms. IN order to address the social / emotional and cultural adjustments ELL students experience, staff members designed the Transition Program. Through this program, students learn to share their perspectives and take risks in the classroom as they develop language proficiency in a supportive environment. In order to assist our students in transitioning to high school, eighth grade students follow individualized programming. Students in the TBE class are offered opportunities to individualize their schedule through electives as well as the language proficiency ENL / ELA programming. Many of our ELL students and FELL students also take part in the specialized high school classes given in the summer and fall as well as have placement in Math and American History regents courses. Teachers of ELLs and school counselors assist ELLs and their parents during the high school application process in order to ensure the high schools our students apply to provide ELL services for continued support. ELL teachers will receive 50% of their professional development requirements by receiving ELL specific professional development. Every Monday during professional development time. During this time all ENL/ELA teachers and content teachers working with ELLs will meet to conduct student work analysis to make instructional and curricular decisions concerning our unique population of students. Each teacher will also turn-key the professional development workshops they have attended in regard to ELLs during this allotted time. We will also use this time to debrief inter-visitations and analyze school wide ELL data to ensure we are consistently modifying our lessons based on formative and summative data collection. Agendas and attendance will he kept by the facilitator of these meetings, Ms. Stack and housed in a professional development log as the minutes accumulate the time is tracked to ensure compliance. ELL teachers will also provide In-House professional development on ELL compliance as well as ELL differentiation and strategies. Other opportunities provided by the New York City Department of Education's Office of ELLs will be frequented and turn-keyed to staff members. There is a professional development log housed in the main office to track each teachers participation in City- Wide professional development experiences, tracking both minutes and the focus of each PD. The 15% total hours for all teachers are going to be given between Election Day Professional Development Day and the June 2018-19 RSCEP-R 97  Professional Development Day. Teachers will receive training in the Quality Teaching for English Language Learners workshop by the Assistant Principal who is a certified trainer. She will work with teachers on different ways to differentiate instruction in the content area classroom and how to implement these strategies effectively. Agendas and copies of the training will be kept in the ELL Data folder. The trainings will consist of scaffolding of poetry, literary texts, and social studies. These strategies can also be easily applied to science as well. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers will conduct individual parent meetings with parents of students of ELLs at least one time during the year between the months of November and January. These meetings will be held during parent outreach time and scheduled in advance at the first parent teacher conference. Any parent who can not sign up for a date or time for the individual conference will be called by the homeroom teacher or parent coordinator to set up a meeting. Present at these meetings will be the ENL Teacher, Content Area Teachers who teach the student, the parent or guardian, the student his/herself, as well as an appropriate translator if necessary. At this meeting all assessment data will be shared and explained to parents and the parent, teachers, and students will create student achievement goals. These goals will be tracked and monitored by teachers and progress reports will be provided monthly through skedula as well as sent home in the parents home language. Through these meetings parents and students can take ownership of linguistic goal setting for each ELL student, that will be consistently monitored throughout the course of the school year. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parental Involvement at MS 363 takes on many forms: During the summer months, staff members of the school conduct home visits to the residences of students on the projected enrollment roster. Each home visit consists of an English speaking and Spanish speaking staff member and attempts are made to assign translators of other languages families may speak based on initial phone conversations with families. On each home visit, parents receive pertinent information regarding academic expectations for the upcoming year. These visits also serve as a platform for parents to share questions or express concerns regarding the expectations in the comfort of their own home. In September, parents and students are invited to an orientation session, Back to School Night, where they receive an informal walking tour of the school and community (if families are new residents to the neighborhood). At this two hour informational session, parents are informed about the academic and behavioral expectations for students in order to promote the educational goals for the school. Staff members provide translations for parents who feel more comfortable receiving the information in their native language. In addition, parents have the opportunity to meet with teachers, the school based medical clinic, community based organizations and the parent coordinator to learn how the entire school community can support parents in fostering their children's success. Parents receive information regarding opportunities for involvement throughout the school year. These opportunities range from organized teams such as: Parent Association: This core group of individuals has varying roles, from electing PA members for the SLT, conducting outreach to other parents and offering support for school activities. The School Leadership Team: SLT is comprised of parents, school personnel and community members. This forum provides an opportunity to our parents to voice concerns and create input in the development of education programs in 363 as well as in the preparation and evaluation of the comprehensive educational plan (CEP). In addition, this school offers Parent Education classes through the Education for Excellence Parent Leadership Academy, that 2018-19 RSCEP-R 98  are conducted at a convenient time for parents and are led by staff members that cover topics such as Learning How to Support Your Child Academically, Navigating the High School Application Process (when applicable), Common Core Standards, Understanding Special Education and Ways to Stay Involved in Your Child’s Education. The Parent Resource Center was created by Parent Coordinator Tamara Rosado and offers ongoing workshops from September until June. Along with these workshops, training opportunities are provided that focus on such skills as Tech 101, Resume Writing, and CPR Training. It is the expectation that these offerings, facilitated in English and Spanish, establishes a positive relationship and cultivates a rich experience for both parents and staff and provide continued support parents need to cultivate and sustain their child(s) success. This school partners with Community Based Organizations that provide workshops to all parents including parents of ELLs. These organizations offer parent orientation workshops that keep parents abreast about innovative ways to support their children inside and outside of the school. One of the first organizations is Inwood House which is an entity devoted to responsibility, excellence, achievement and leadership and provides educational enrichment and support through creative arts and fitness opportunities to students in the Bronx. A second CBO is ENACT, a program that develops social and emotional skills within students and conflict resolution techniques through drama therapy. In addition, the school works in conjunction with the Morris Heights Health Clinic which provides programs to promote and ensure physical and mental health throughout the school population. Finally, Wediko Children Services responds to the needs of children who face repeated obstacles to development due to social, emotional, behavioral, and learning challenges. They partner with children, families, schools and the community to offer a continuum of flexible and multi-disciplinary programs. As Part of our CEP we have been working to increase parental engagement through monthly family nights in which parents are invited to join their student and staff members in building relationships. These activities include a family swim night in the pol on campus, an arts and crafts night, movie night, a community gardening activity, game night, family barbecue etc. Parents of ELLs will be offered an opportunity to engage in a family literacy building program which will take place for 6 consecutive Saturdays in February and March of 2016. Parents are invited to engage in language acquisition ENL classes with their middle school child while an early literacy teacher works with the younger siblings to provide early literacy classes through read-aloud, puppet shows, and literacy building games and activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Parental Response to question 2 was unable to type in that section so we are typing it here; parents have their first individual meeting with an ENL teacher upon admission into the school. She makes herself available to answer their questions about programs and information about the school. That information is kept in the student's cumulative records. Additional ELL parent meetings are run by the Parent Coordinator and outreach is done by classroom parents who call parents and inform them of information going on in the school or in their child's classroom. All of this information is kept in parent out-reach binders. Compliance letters are sent out in the native language by the ELL Assistant Principal and any in-person meetings which have to deal with curriculum or instruction is held by the student's particular teacher or during conferencing time. We are trying for the first time this year student led conferences and hope that way students are held responsible for their actions and accountable to their parents. These meetings are kept in logs. For Parent outreach, translations and interpretations, we have 183 parents who speak Spanish making it easy to translate information since our Assistant Principal or a school aide or Parent Coordinator can help us. We have 3 Haitian Creole families; 1 Bengali; 1 Thai; 2 Fulani: 1 Hausa . Most of those languages we can get templates of important documents of the Translation and Interpretation units website t We make every effort to ensure all of our parents and students receive all the data and information they need in the language of their choice whenever possible. We also have a CBO ENACT which is a drama program which works with our TBE students and they are able to use drama to 2018-19 RSCEP-R 99  express themselves and have found it very successful in getting those students to open up and use English in a different format. Title III also seems to be very successful in our school. Depending on funds we try to have two sessions. One which focuses on preparing for the NYSESLAT and another which focuses more on language immersion through trips such as Alley Duck Pond where the students do community building activities and have to use language to give each other commands. They also go on Circle Line Trips and trips to the Statue of Liberty. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 100 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Angelo Ledda, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-R 101  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: APLE School DBN: 10X363 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Angelo Ledda Title Principal Abby Falberg Assistant Principal Tamara Rosado Parent Coordinator Taylor Strack ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Dominga Lopez/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Maurice Childs/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Gisela Bravo School Counselor Maribel Hulla Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Yvette Ramos Other Speech Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2/1/2018 2/1/2018 2/1/2018 2/1/2018 2/1/2018 2/1/2018 2/1/2018 2/1/2018 1/1/01 2/1/2018 1/1/01 2018-19 RSCEP-R 102  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X363 School Name: Academy for Pers. Leadership & Exce Superintendent: Melodie Mashel The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to assess the school's written translation and oral interpretaion needs is the RPOB which besides showing place of birth also provides you with information regarding the various home languages in the school. Currently we have the following breakdown of students; 1 Afrikaans, 2 Albanian, 3 Arabic, 1 Bengali, 1 French, 3 Fulani, 1 Hausa, 1 Nepali, 1 Samoan, 1 Twi, 1 Vietnamese, 1 Thai and 210 Spanish. As is fortuitous for us those parents with the children of most of the low-incidence languages with the exception of the 3 Arabic and 1 Bengali all prefer that documents sent home are in Spanish. We ensure that all documents are double-sided English and Spanish and separate translated versions are made for the Bengali and Arabic double sided English with their specific language. We ensure with the low-incidence language upon initial enrollment during the interview process if the parent prefers school notifications in the child's language as well or if they prefer English 2018-19 RSCEP-R 103  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language The data used to assess the school's written translation and oral interpretaion needs is the RPOB which besides showing place of birth also provides you with information regarding the various home languages in the school. Currently we have the following breakdown of students; 1 Afrikaans, 2 Albanian, 3 Arabic, 1 Bengali, 1 French, 3 Fulani, 1 Hausa, 1 Nepali, 1 Samoan, 1 Twi, 1 Vietnamese, 1 Thai and 210 Spanish. As is fortuitous for us those parents with the children of most of the low-incidence languages with the exception of the 3 Arabic and 1 Bengali all prefer that documents sent home are in Spanish. We ensure that all documents are double-sided English and Spanish and separate translated versions are made for the Bengali and Arabic double sided English with their specific language. We ensure with the low-incidence language upon initial enrollment during the interview process if the parent prefers school notifications in the child's language as well or if they prefer English.The data used to assess the school's written translation and oral interpretaion needs is the RPOB which besides 2018-19 RSCEP-R 104  showing place of birth also provides you with information regarding the various home languages in the school. Currently we have the following breakdown of students; 1 Afrikaans, 2 Albanian, 3 Arabic, 1 Bengali, 1 French, 3 Fulani, 1 Hausa, 1 Nepali, 1 Samoan, 1 Twi, 1 Vietnamese, 1 Thai and 210 Spanish. As is fortuitous for us those parents with the children of most of the low-incidence languages with the exception of the 3 Arabic and 1 Bengali all prefer that documents sent home are in Spanish. We ensure that all documents are double-sided English and Spanish and separate translated versions are made for the Bengali and Arabic double sided English with their specific language. We ensure with the low-incidence language upon initial enrollment during the interview process if the parent prefers school notifications in the child's language as well or if they prefer English. After this information is sorted at the beginning of the Academic Year, this information is shared with the Parent Coordinator who then shares it with the PTA and subsequently to the SLT by either a school administrator or the school secretary who regularly attends the SLT meetings. This is done not just to share the various and 2018-19 RSCEP-R 105  wide ranging languages present in our school but to track the changing demographics of the school and the ever increasing presence of students from the various countries of Africa. We also use the students' home language information, especially in the instances of the low-incidence languages to prepare for translation services for those students who are identified as ELL and said service will be needed during certain high stakes examinations 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Written translations in Spanish are done by the Assistant Principal, who is a licensed Spanish teacher as well, in-house an therefore and outside vendor is not needed. For our low-incidence languages such as Bengali and Arabic we use Google Translate to translate any documents and it has proven to be effective. For our other languages such as Afrikaans, Albanian, Haitian Creole, Urdu, Fulani, French and Nepali, 2018-19 RSCEP-R 106  although these are listed as the students' language of preferance the parents requested written communication to be done in English. All efforts are made to ensure that any translated document translated either personally by the Assistant Principal or with the assistance of Google Translate are provided the same day as its English counterpart; hence parents all receive any important school information simultaneously regardless of the language being used. Google Translate is used in these instances to ensure documents are translated in a timely manner especially if it is for an even or activity that is forthcoming and there is no time to email it to the Translation and Interpretaion Unit. In instances where we do know within the required window of two - three weeks for turn around of documents sent to that particular unit, we make all efforts to utilize their services. As of now, the parents needs seem to be fully addressed with the use of Google Translate. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? What has been a common trend in our school is that those parents who speak low-incidence languages bring their own interpreters in the form of a family member or family friend; therefore this reduces the burden of calling the interpretation services office for an interpreter. In the case of Spanish, interpretation is provided either by the Family Worker, the Pupil Accounting Secretary, Parent Coordinator or if necessary by the Assistant Principa 2018-19 RSCEP-R 107  3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The appropriate postings for the availability of Interpretaion Services are posted in the school's main office and is easily visble by those who come into our office. Since most of the parents' native language is Spanish, all postings and notifications throughout the school which are meant to be visible and accessible to parents are done in both Spanish and English. As previously noted, written translations in Spanish are done by the Assistant Principal, who is a liecnsed Spanish teacher as well, in-house and therefore an outside vendor is not needed. For our low-incidence languages such as Bengali and Arabic we use Google Translate to translate any documents and it has proven to be effective. For our other languages such as Afrikaans, Albanian, Haitian Creole, Urdu, Fulani, French and Nepali, although these are listed as the students' language of preferance the parents requested written communication to be done in English. All efforts are made to ensure that any translated document translated either personally by the Assistant Principal or with the assistance of Google Translate are provided the same day as its English counterpart; hence parents all receive any important school information simultaneously regardless of the language being used. Google Translate is used in these instances to ensure documents are translated in a timely manner especially if it is for an even or activity that is forthcoming and there is no time to email it to the Translation and Interpretaion Unit. In instances where we do know within the required window of two - three weeks for turn around of documents sent to that particular unit, we make all efforts to utilize their services. As of now, the parents needs seem to be fully addressed with the use of Google Translate. Also as previously stated, what has been a common trend in our school is that those parents who speak low-incidence languages bring their own interpreters in the form of a family member or family friend; therefore this reduces the burden of calling the interpretation services office for an interpreter. In the case of Spanish, interpretation is provided either by the Family Worker, the Pupil Accounting Secretary, Parent Coordinator or if necessary by the Assistant Principal Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services 2018-19 RSCEP-R 108  Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Learning Environment Survey Parent Surveys Parent Workshops Parent Coordinator Community Base Organization Community School Manager 2018-19 RSCEP-R 109 
