 09X365 School Name: ACADEMY FOR LANGUAGE AND TECHNOLOGY Principal: JOSE VINALES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Academy for Language and Technology 320900011365 9-12 1700 Macombs Road, Bronx NY, 10453 School Number (DBN): 09X365 718-731-2019 Phone Number: 718-731-2031 Fax: José Viñales jvinales@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: José Viñales Andres Perez Andres Perez Pedro Taveras ElcileidySantana Jose Holguin Julianna Graves District Information Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2 Metrotech, 3rd Floor Brooklyn, NY 11201 malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-8534 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (917) 608-0230 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jose Vinales Andres Perez Elizabeth Rodriguez Pedro Taveras ElcileidySantana Jose Holguin JuliannaGraves Kathryn Burke Michelle Deery Jose Muniz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/ Parent   Name Maria MatiasGonzalez AlejandrinaSosa Alejandro Arriaga N/A N/A N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The Academy for Language and Technology will nurture inquiry learning, character development, and community building. Our focus is to prepare students to compete in the global economy. Students will be afforded opportunities to connect technology to real world experiences via internships. Advanced learning methods, technology, and a professional environment will offer ALT students the opportunity to engage in higher levels of real world learning.   Community, leadership, and social activism will lead ALT’s school culture to nurture the growth of articulate responsible citizens. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Academy for Language and Technology is a small high school designed to meet the needs of English Language Learners from Spanish speaking countries. Our students enter 9th grade with little knowledge of the English Language and, often with, large gaps in their education. In order to achieve our mission of college and career readiness for all students, our students take additional ESL and CTE classes to prepare for Regents exams, CTE certification exams, and meet the standards of college readiness. We have articulation agreements with Monroe College and Bronx Community College to ensure that we are providing rigorous college-level classes to our students. Our school works on a multi-session, extended day schedule. We use block scheduling to ensure that students receive the appropriate classes, credits, and CTE courses. The block schedule also allows teacher teams a period of time to meet while their students are at lunch. Teachers participate in a daily professional development period during their regular work day to ensure that grade teams and content teams can meet together. This allows teachers greater ability to collaborate with colleagues and work together to meet the needs of their students. Teachers also provide after-school AIS instruction to our neediest students from 4-5 pm. In addition, students attend Saturday classes from 9-1pm to better prepare for the state exams. Our school’s mission is based on the belief that all students can graduate prepared for college and careers. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our entire population is comprised of English language learners from Spanish speaking countries. Some of them are SIFE students with interrupted education at some point in their academic years. Many of our students who come from middle schools have large gaps in language acquisition and need extensive supports to be able to pass classes and Regents exams in order to graduate. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Following discussions and an analysis of English Regents results among grade teams and departments, the faculty has agreed that students need further development in their writing skills and determining the meaning of unfamiliar words and use of academic vocabulary. As our school is 100% English Language Learners, all invested parties have agreed that a focus on building writing skills will lead to higher rates of college and career readiness with increased scores on the SAT, AP exams, and the Common Core Regents. Our English Regents passing rate for June 2018 is 40%. Some of out key focuses include:  Rigorous Instruction: In addition to Regents data which will be made available in the end of June, we increased the number of students taking AP and SAT exams.  Effective School Leadership: In the 2016-17 school year, there was a reduction in the number of teachers scoring ineffective or developing by 21% in Domain 1 Planning and Preparation. In September of 2016, 54% of teachers were rated ineffective/developing and by June 2017, 33% of teachers were rated ineffective/developing 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X365 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 323 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 2 2 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 24 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 96.3% % Reduced Lunch 66.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 99.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.91 4% 30% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 96% 98% 96.1% 10.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A N/A N/A 15 87.5% 2.2% 9.6% 0.3% 0.0% 0.0% 2 35% 3.6 N/A N/A 99% 99% 94.3% 22% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A YES YES 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our school’s strengths relative to rigorous instruction include advanced level classes and college prep for all of our students. Last school year, 100% of 11th and 12th grade students were enrolled in Advanced Placement level classes including AP Environmental Science and AP Government. Additionally, approximately 20% of our 11th grade students in the 2016-17 school year were enrolled in college level classes at Monroe College or Bronx Community College. 2. Our schools priority needs relative to rigorous instruction include increasing passing rates on the ELA exam. Based on our data, in June 2018, 40.0% of students passed the Common Core ELA Regents. In June 2017 40% of students passed the Common Core ELA Regents. Our 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot shows a graduation rate of 96%; however, however, 43% graduated college ready (based on CUNY assessment standards) which is below the city’s 47%. State assessments shifted towards the Common Core Learning Standards, and our English Language Learners’ population is faced with more challenging standards. Our students continue to struggle expressing their thoughts in writing, face the challenge of learning a new language, and building their vocabulary across all subject areas. Our goal is to increase students’ achievement on college readiness exams such as SAT, PSAT, Regents Data, AP exams etc. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the passing rate on the ELA Regents exam from 40.0% in June 2018 to 45.0% in June 2019. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All curriculum is designed on Curricuplan according to templates that include CCLS standards, evidence of rigor, Response to Intervention and Universal Design for Learning, and authentic connections. All content departments will align all learning standards to the Common Core Learning Standards and include the Citywide Instructional Education Shifts in their weekly content team meetings. Each department will create a normed literacy goal to support the schoolwide goal of increasing the June ELA Regents pass rate. Teachers will meet in teams to receive professional development on curriculum design and instruction. All first and second year teachers meet individually with a full time Curriculum Specialist and are coached on how to develop units and lesson plans that are aligned to standards and provide scaffolds for all learners. Teacher Teams meet daily. Individual teachers meet with the Curriculum Specialist weekly, and department teams meet bimonthly or monthly. Teachers will use formative and summative data to identify targeted Common Core Learning Standards, skills, and Assessment for Learning (AFL). Use of Assessment for Learning (AFL) will empower students to track their learning progress on specific standards and will allow teachers to provide, appropriate scaffolds, and differentiation (tiered instruction). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School administrators Instructional Support Specialist, Grade Advisers, Teachers 9-12th grade students September 2018, December 2018, March 2019 9-12th grade students September 2018, February 2019, June 2019 October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019 School administrators Instructional Support Specialist, Grade Advisers, Teachers School administrators Instructional Support Specialist, Grade Advisers, Teachers, Parents/Guardians Students who may be in the lower third or identified as SIFE, will receive additional support after-school in order to review and reinforce key concepts and skills that they need in order to support increased proficiency on the Common Core ELA exams. 9-12th grade students In addition, parents/guardians will receive ESL classes on Saturdays. Families have an opportunity to engage with teachers six times a year at Parent Teacher events to discuss curriculum and instruction. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 3  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents participate in curriculum night where teachers explain our definition of rigor and review the curriculum that students will be engaged in throughout the school year. Each teacher is teamed with a bilingual person who can interpret for parents who are monolingual. In addition, counselors meet regularly with parents to review the courses students will be taking and provide strategies to parents to support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Educational Consultant (20 days), one full time Instructional Support Specialist with limited teaching schedule, daily professional period for all grade teams to meet together daily. 48 hours of per session has been allotted for the teacher who delivers instruction to parents/guardians on Saturdays. Curriculum planning software has been purchased. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By September 30, 2018, all teachers will create curriculum maps and units with department teams and align it to Common Core Standards using common templates on Curricuplan. At the end of each trimester, December 2018, March 2019 and June 2019, teachers will review their curriculum with grade teams using the Tri-State Rubric and submit curriculum to the Instructional Support Specialist at the end of each trimester. Periodic Assessments will take place in each class by September 30, 2018, November 30, 2018, March 30, 2019, and May 30, 2019 to assess students' progress on the ELA assessments. Teachers will submit all assessment data and data analyses to the instructional support specialist for review by October 2018, December 2018, March 2019, and June 2019. By mid- February 2019, we will have an increase in our Periodic Assessments by 20% from the first administration in September 2018. Teachers will follow the literacy plan timeline by grade and department level to monitor progress and implementation of literacy goals. Teachers will assess students' progress using periodic assessments in all departments in September, December, March, and June. Grade teams will analyze student data from mock regents after each administration and share their data in weekly department meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Mock Regents to be administered in November 2018, January 2019, and April 2019 in all Regents-bearing classes; January Regents results in Algebra I and Common Core ELA; DYO Assessments administered September 2018, November 2018, March 2019, and June 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In analyzing the school survey, we saw that we can work harder on addressing students’ individual needs. Both students and teachers agree that adults need to do a better job in helping students regulate and modify their behavior. Students reported that teachers notice when they are feeling upset or having emotional difficulty. In order address this, counselors will provide training to teachers on social and emotional development of our students. Additionally, we will increase the number of students involved in our Learning Support Unit (LSU). In LSU, students who are most at risk meet with a mentor teacher once every two weeks to discuss current academic and social/emotional progress in school Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: By June 2019, the school’s rating on the Social Emotional Section on the Learning Environment Survey will improve from 74% in 2018 to 80% in 2019 on the section, "teachers say that adults at their school teach students the skill they need to regulate their behavior" by incorporating the Seven Values of Success, and training teachers on Social and Emotional Learning strategies. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Our LSU program will focus on identifying students who are struggling academically or socially and they will be provided a mentor teacher who will be able to monitor their progress and meet with them regularly in order to improve their academic scores. Each grade team will collaborate and analyze students’ needs as they assess their lowest tiers of students. All incoming students will attend an orientation in the summer where they will be introduced to the 7 Values of Success: Loyalty, Respect, Resilience, Honesty, Integrity, Humility, and Fairness. This will assist in creating a culture that recognizes and abides by these values. 9th-12th grade Students October 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal and teachers 9th-12th grade Students August 2018 Administration, Grade Advisers, Teachers Each marking period students who represent each of the 7 values will be recognized as we celebrate their achievements. At the end of the year and at graduation students will be recognized and awarded certificates. 9th-12th grade Students Oct 2018-June 2019 Administration, Grade Advisers, Teachers Counselors will provide ongoing trainings to teachers regarding social and emotional development of our students during teachers’ Common Planning Time. Specifically, counselors will focus on students identifying and managing their own emotions and reactions. Additional training will be done by consultants on emotional intelligence. Teachers October 2018-May 2019 Administration, Guidance Team 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Once students are enrolled in our school, New Parent Orientations are conducted. We offer the orientations on different days and different times to accommodate parents’ schedules. Additionally, parents are encouraged to come to curriculum night and parent teacher conferences where the guidance counselors are available to meet with parents. If parents are not able to attend curriculum night or parent teacher conferences, they are able to schedule an individual meeting with our guidance counselors to address the social and emotional development of their child. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Per-Session for after-school meetings for counselors who are meeting with parents after school hours (October 1, 2018-June 2019). Additionally, counselors, teachers, and staff who participate in the three (3) New Parent Orientations are provided per-session when the orientation occurs after school hours. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By end of each marking period we will assess the number of candidates eligible to earn recognition for the 7 Values of Success awards based on teacher feedback. Administrators and teachers will meet in January 2019 to review progress of students who were identified to participate in LSU in the first trimester. Progress will be evaluated by a review of student's academic marks and teacher anecdotal logs. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Student Report Cards and teacher entered data in Skedula, our online grade book software. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. During the 2017-2018 school year, 10.3% teachers on staff received a rating of ineffective and 18.3% developing on one or more of their observations in the area of Domain 1e Preparation and Planning. 13 out of 25 teachers were new teachers who were in the classroom for the first time this year. Although these new teachers received intensive support through lesson clinics, mentoring and during team meetings, they still need to learn and improve on the planning of instruction. Our goal is to have teachers collaborate on planning throughout the year in order to improve our data in the area of Domain 1 Planning and Preparation. Teachers meet in teams daily to receive professional development on planning and pedagogical strategies. 2. Tiered instruction will be used in all classrooms to support differentiation in three different levels based on student outcomes in each subject area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: By June 2019, 100% of teachers will meet in grade teams and content teams to include differentiation in their lesson plans as evidenced through growth in Domain 1e- Planning and Preparation from a rating average of 2.68 in June 2018 to 3.0 by June 2019. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Common Planning Time will be allocated for interdisciplinary planning on weekly basis for each subject area. Teachers will meet in grade teams daily to focus on planning and preparation of units and lesson plans that aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. New teachers will be supported in lesson plan development by the Instructional Support Specialist who will meet regularly with each teacher to review and revise curriculum plans. Daily through Common Planning Time. All teachers will receive training on unit and lesson plan development, the use of Curricuplan, and unit and lesson assessments using the tri-state rubric. Additionally, time will be allotted for PD in the content team as well as peer-visitations among content teachers. These interactions will be teacher guided and will provide time for collegial feedback and review amongst teachers. Professional Development on how to improve students’ academic vocabulary and writing skills across content areas will take place through grade team meetings. Additionally, training in implementing UDL strategies will be provided to all teachers throughout the year in order to meet the needs of our diverse student body. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teachers September 2018-June 2019 Administration, grade advisers, Teaching staff, Instructional Support Specialist All faculty members September 2018-June 2019 Administration, grade advisers All faculty members September 2018-2019 Administration, instructional support specialist How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents are invited to be part of the School Leadership Team which meets every month to discuss and voice opinions on current school initiatives. An addition, a certified teacher provides ENL instruction open to all parents on Saturdays throughout the year. Parents can communicate and monitor student progress through Skedula accounts. Parents receive support in using Skedula during Parent Teacher Conference events throughout year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 9  Instructional Support Specialist, who teaches a .2 teaching schedule, provides support to pedagogues daily during Common Planning Time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. All teachers will submit Unit Plans, Curriculum Maps, samples of student work from culminating assessments in December 2018, March 2019 and June 2019, three times a year for evidence of alignment. By the end of March 2019, data from Advance will be used to determine progress towards meeting this goal with specific reference to Domain 1e. Lesson plans will be monitored weekly through Curricuplan and through the regular observation process. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance data reports, Attendance at Common Planning Meetings, Lesson Clinics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. An analysis of the Advance data report for 2017-2018 reveals that out of 113 ratings 9.38% of teachers assessed scored ineffective and 21.33 % of teachers assessed scored developing in Danielson’s Domain 3b- Questioning and Discussion techniques. The leadership team uses the Danielson’s Framework to provide frequent cycles of observations with timely, specific, and actionable feedback that teachers can quickly implement during instruction in order to support teacher growth and student outcomes. In addition, the feedback received from the Superintendent during the PPO visit focused on the need to engage students in Socratic seminars and increase student- to- student discussions. Furthermore, teachers responded to a survey on professional development in May, and many indicated that they required additional support in student engagement. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal: There will be an increase of teachers scoring effective and highly effective in domain 3b- Questioning and Discussion from an average of 2.67/4.0 to an average of 3.0/4.0 on the Danielson Framework for Teaching by June 2019 through supportive lesson clinics, mentoring, frequent observations, and professional development. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers will be provided with mentors and lesson clinics with instructional specialists and consultants. During this time, teachers will work one on one in order to maximize instructional time in the classroom. All teachers September 2018-May 2019 Principal, Instructional Support Specialist School-wide faculty meetings will be held once a month to address goals for teachers and within the departments to assess personal PD plans, teacher progress in Danielson’s Framework, and CCLS and teaching and learning clinics will also be held by informed by mentors, the principal, and educational consultants All teachers Once a month; September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Instructional Support Specialist Grade teams will meet daily for common planning time to keep current with each other’s progress in terms of content, collaboration, and CCLS, along with the allocation of time for peer-to-peer professional development. All teachers will be provided with an in-depth teaching and learning rubric based on Danielson’s Framework that will be used to assess performance that will help aid in the creation of identifiable professional development goals for the year. Principal and Assistant Principal will conduct frequent informal and formal observations using the Danielson Framework to support teacher development All teachers Daily; September 2018-June 2019 Instructional Support Specialist, All Pedagogues, Principal All teachers Weekly; September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents attend curriculum night where teachers share what students will be learning in their classes. New parent orientations are held in the Spring and the summer to help parents learn about our school and special academic programs that our students will be part of. Parents are encouraged to lead the parent association meetings and take part in the School Leadership team. All teachers participate in curriculum night as well as orientation and the administrative team oversees all sessions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Full time Instructional Support Specialist has received a lightened teaching load to meet with teachers, conduct professional development on Danielson's Framework, and engage in lesson clinics daily with developing teachers. A Consultant supports the development of a year-long professional development plan for teachers. Time has been allocated for all teachers to meet during Common Planning Time. New teachers will be provided with a mentor who will meet with them regularly to improve their teaching practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By September 30, 2018, a professional development plan will be created that meets the needs of all teachers. In addition Common Planning Time will incorporate professional development targeted to new teachers. School leaders will complete cycle of observations by May 30, 2019 to monitor teacher's progress in all areas of Danielson's Framework. By September 30, 2018, teachers will meet with the principal to establish year-long goals, in January 2019 to measure progress toward their goals, and in May 30, 2019 to evaluate their progress throughout the year. By February 2019, data from the Advance system will be used to monitor progress in Domain 3b. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Reports will be used to measure progress on the Danielson Framework for Teaching and Learning at the end of each observation cycle Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Our school has been successful in building relationships with local colleges and has articulation agreements with Monroe College, Bronx Community College, and Borough of Manhattan Community College where students can take college levels courses and can earn an Associate’s degree while still in high school in order to increase our students’ college readiness. 2. Our school community is made up of 100% Spanish-speaking families, many of whom are new to the country and do not speak English at home. Counselors support students and families socio-emotionally as well as academically. We are proud of our supportive community and the opportunity we provide for second language enhancement. An area of growth is to increase the number of participants at Parent-Teacher conferences and Curriculum nights. In order to achieve that, we will offer Saturday classes to inform parents about our school in order to engage them fully in their child’s educational experience. A review of the 2017-2018 school year’s attendance indicates that in September 115 parents attended; in November 164 parents attended; in March 122 parents attended; and in May 35 parents attended. We hope to increase these numbers by training parents on Saturdays on the use of technology and in English as a Second Language. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. A minimum of 15 parents will attend Parent ESL Saturday Classes from October 2018-May 2019. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents will receive letters, fliers, and phone calls informing them of upcoming Saturday parent ESL classes. Parents and Guardians A bilingual Spanish-English licensed pedagogue will conduct parent Saturday ESL classes. She will be supported by a bilingual Spanish-English technology teacher. In addition to ESL services, parents will also take cultural excursions, such as visits to museums and plays. Students Parents and Guardians Administration Administration October 2018-May 2019 October 2018-May 2019 Since this is a technology high school, our aim is to make the parents of our students technology-savvy as well. Therefore, we will also be offering instruction in computer literacy in conjunction with ESL classes. Parents and Guardians October 2018-May 2019 Administration 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We partner with Bronx Connect, EnAct, Monroe College, and Bronx Community College, and Borough of Manhattan Community College. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A Parent Coordinator and one Community Associate are hired to support parent engagement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 5  Parent attendance will be taken at every Saturday class and monitored throughout the school year. Parents will be asked to provide feedback on additional supports that the school can provide in order for parents to attend and benefit from information shared at these meetings. By the end of February 2019, we will assess progress towards meeting the goal by reviewing attendance rosters from the two parent events already held. A minimum of 15 parents will attend parent Saturday ESL classes throughout the school year starting October 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Attendance Registers at the parent classes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All ELL students will receive Academic Intervention Services in 9th and 10th grade. Students who still need to pass the English Regents exams will attend AIS in 11th and 12th Grade. Mathematics All ELL students will receive AIS in 9th and 10th Grade. Students who need to pass the Algebra Regents will attend AIS in 11th and 12th grade. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Classes are divided by English language proficiency. Students attend tutoring sessions that target English reading and writing skills and strategies. Students will receive additional small-group instruction after school and on Saturdays. Students will receive small group instruction after school and on Saturdays. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) All 9th and 10th grade students attend Saturday Academy to receive further instruction and remediation in English. 11th and 12th grade students receive additional English classes throughout the day. 11th and 12th grade students are also invited to come to Saturday Academy for reinforce skills. Additional instruction time is provided for tier 3 students in all grades after school and on Saturdays. Design Your Own Assessment (DYO) and Differentiated Instruction will be used to target specific math standards necessary according to the Common Core needs assessment. Tier 3 students receive after school and Saturday academic intervention classes. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Students will receive additional English and ESL classes during their regular school day. In addition, after school and Saturday classes will be offered throughout the school year. Additionally, students who have received below passing on their ELA exam will receive additional instruction during the summer. Students who have scored below passing on the Regents exam receive additional instruction in the summer and Saturday Academies prior to the Regents. In addition, because of our extended-day schedule, all students spend additional periods each week during the regular school day with a 7  Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students will receive small group instruction after school and on Saturdays. Students will receive small group instruction after school and on Saturdays. Students targeted for Academic Intervention Services receive individual, group counseling and class intervention. All ELL students will receive AIS in 9th and 10 th grade. Students who need to pass the Living Environment or Earth Science Regents in 10th grade will attend AIS in 11th and 12th Grade. All ELL students will receive AIS in 9th and 10th Grade. Students who fail to pass the Global and US History Regents in 10th grade will attend AIS in 11th and 12th Grade. Students who have low attendance (less than 70% attendance) are at-risk for failing classes, or who are not on track for graduation by the end of 10th grade are part of our AIS program, Saturday program, and Learning Support Unit (LSU) program. DYO assessments based on selected CCLS will be used to target specific science standards necessary according to the Common Core needs assessment. Tier 3 students will receive additional periods of science instruction after school. DYO assessments will be used to target specific social studies standards necessary according to the Common Core needs assessment. English and ENL teachers support history by supporting the content and literacy skills presented in the History Regents. Tier 3 students also receive additional instruction after school and during Saturday Academy. Counselors get referrals from teachers and school staff about specific student needs. They will promote student success, provide preventive services, and identify and respond to students’ needs addressing academic, career, and personal/social development. A.L.T. school counselors certified math instructor. Students who have scored below passing on the Regents exam receive additional instruction in the summer and after school. In addition, because of our extended-day schedule, all students spend additional periods each week during school hours with a certified science instructor. Students who have scored below passing on the Regents exam receive additional instruction in the summer and after school. During the implementation of our extended-day schedule, all students spend additional minutes each week during school hours with social studies instructors. At-risk services will be provided to students during the school day, after school, and on Saturdays. Additionally, students who are not on track to graduate will attend Summer classes. 8  provide direct services to students and families, individual student planning services, and preventive and responsive services. Our counseling curriculum: 1. Implements developmentally appropriate and prevention-oriented group activities to meet students’ needs and support school goals. 2. Provides leadership training with other educators to ensure students’ academic success. 3. Provides individual and group counseling to students with identified concerns and needs. 4. Implements effective referrals and follow-up processes. 5. Participates in professional developmental activities to improve knowledge and skills. 6. Fosters early awareness and exposure to colleges and careers. 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) We have a total of 108 students in temporary housing, 8 students identified in shelters and 100 students identified as doubled up. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. To provide additional support, students participate in Academic Intervention Services after school. Students in Temporary Housing attend Saturday Academy on Saturdays for additional academic support to reinforce and practice skills that they learned in the classroom and are essential for their academic success. All students are scheduled for extended day instruction. We provide uniforms and additional warm clothes for the winter including jackets, gloves, and hats. Transportation is provided for students. We support our Students in Temporary Housing (STH) by providing the students with food services before, during and after school. Additionally, this year we will provide free eye screenings and free dental screenings to all students in collaboration with Optical Academy and DentaQuest. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not Applicable 0  2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. Not Applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not Applicable 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Teachers have an open door to participate in leadership teams, create their own extracurricular programs, pursue opportunities to participate in meetings with partners and attend conferences (paid for by the school), and receive opportunities to attend outside training and receiving training rates. ● Teachers are also given the opportunity to manage the hiring process; therefore, teachers are hired by other teachers. ● Teachers are also given the opportunity to develop their career interests with the support from the administration. Supports: ● All teachers are scheduled to meet daily for Common Planning Time where collaboration, support, and time to reflect on teaching and learning is facilitated. ● All teachers, as needed, have the support of having individualized lesson clinics. This clinic is to allow the teacher to work with an instructional specialist to clarify and develop best teaching and learning practices. ● Teachers are assigned a mentor teacher that continue the added support on a weekly basis. ● Outside consultants are hired to further provide added supports, professional development and feedback to teachers as needed. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Teachers receive feedback on curriculum alignment from instructional specialists, administration, educational consultants, and colleagues during daily common planning time. 2  ● Teachers are provided with model curriculum map and unit plans designed to enable all students to meet the Common Core State Standards. ● Teachers, administrators and instructional support staff have access to one another’s curriculum through the online curriculum planning tool Curricuplan. ● Grade and Department teams share student data and progress on specific common core standards following each quarterly assessment. ● All first and second year teachers receive an individualized weekly lesson clinic with an instructional support specialist. ● All teachers are scheduled to meet daily for Common Planning Time where collaboration, support, and time to reflect on teaching and learning is facilitated. ● Outside consultants are hired to further provide added supports, professional development and feedback to teachers as needed. ● Peer observation and inter-visitation is facilitated and encouraged by grade teams. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 3  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participate in the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures through the creation of their Design Your Own assessments which are aligned to the Common Core standards. Teachers administer this assessment to their students four times a year in order to measure student growth and mastery of the Common Core Standards. During Professional Development teachers meet during Common Planning Time to review each other’s assessments and provide feedback to their colleagues. Additionally, the Design Your Own assessments are peer reviewed in Department team meetings to ensure alignment to the Common Core standards. In order to improve instruction the results from the assessments are aggregated, analyzed and shared amongst pedagogues. The results of the assessments are shared amongst grade teams and within departments as well to support vertical and horizontal alignment. The results of the Design Your Own assessments are used to group students into tiers. Teachers then use tiered instruction as a strategy to improve instruction and student outcomes. Student NYSESLAT and Regents data is shared in Common Planning Time for teachers to use to inform their instruction, in addition to their DYO data. Teachers and students actively work together to set individual student goals and monitor student progress towards achievement after each DYO administration. Teachers and administrators work together to review teacher data, including previous MOTP scores and student data, and set individual goals for growth for teachers. Progress towards teachers meeting their goals is evidenced through formal and informal observations, as well as peer conducted classroom walkthroughs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal $330,691 $0 $28,238 X N/A X 4 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5D N/A 5B, 5C  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local $0 $2,493,525 N/A X N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs. 5   Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X365, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. ALT will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, such as literacy, math, and use of technology ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: ESL classes, parent financial aid workshops, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, such as, ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) ● schedule additional parent meetings, such as, quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 8  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Parent Curriculum Night ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year ● providing ESL classes for parents on Saturdays. ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress ● developing and distributing a school events and programs calendar designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X365, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently ● respecting cultural, racial, and ethnic differences ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) 9  Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Nights Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians 0  ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs ● monitoring my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● ensuring that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age ● checking and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary ● reading to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes) ● setting limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time ● encouraging my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits ● participating, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district ● responding to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested ● becoming involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact ● participating in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible 1  ● taking part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams ● sharing responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions ● show respect for myself, other people and property ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully ● always try my best to learn 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Pathways to Success is a program to support the education of our newcomers and to foster College and Career Readiness which occurs after the regular school day. Many of our students are recently arrived immigrants from the Caribbean, including Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE), and Long-Term ELLs. Research has shown that strategic, theme-based programs improve academic progress and success within the content area. Using an interdisciplinary approach, the content that students are learning in the standard curricula will be reinforced through additional instruction given during the week (AIS) and on Saturdays. For AIS, each content-area pedagogue will facilitate one hour after school per week to support the lowest-achieving students in each class. Additionally, to provide extra support for Regents-bearing classes, students in the 9th and 10th grades will attend Saturday Academy sessions in each of the four core content areas (Social Studies, English, Math, and Science) which will be facilitated by that specific content-area pedagogue. A strong emphasis will be placed on literacy, numeracy, and academic rigor, often found in this kind of interdisciplinary approach. Furthermore, in following the theme of College and Career Readiness it is essential that our students are provided with meaningful content. Each course is interactive and recognizes the various learning styles and modalities that each child brings to the experience. Students learn best when all modalities, reading, writing, listening and speaking are involved and they are provided with opportunities to interact with the content in this way. The program will begin in September 2018 and end in May 2019. Two certified ENL instructors and a certified Spanish bilingual (Algebra) teachers will join certified content teachers to implement instruction in both Saturday Academy and in AIS. These teachers include two English teachers, two math teachers, two science teachers, two history teachers, and two technology teachers. The bilingual and ENL teachers will support in the instruction, planning, and implementation of instruction with the other teachers. During regular instruction hours, the ENL teachers will also push-in with the ten content area teachers in order to best provide the support needed for the students. The teachers will plan and deliver interdisciplinary lessons aligned not only to the Common Core but to larger school-determined themes as well. Each lesson will be based on an achievable, student-friendly learning objective which will require students to produce and use language in the four main modalities as well as recall, understand, apply, analyze, evaluate, and create tasks that are cognitively challenging and appropriate. Each lesson facilitated during the regular school day and during the supplementary after-school and Saturday Academy periods will include a school-standardized, Common-Core standards based Learning Target worded in student-friendly language, a warm-up activity, a mini-lesson, group and independent practice, and a summary activity to ensure that students achieved the instructional goals. Because our school specifically serves newcomer ELLs and currently has a 68.75% ELL population with 55.94% ELL classifications occurring in the 9th and 10th grade where newcomer populations are the highest, the Saturday Academy program will be open to all 9th 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information graders and 10th graders. Long-Term ELLs in the 11th and 12th grades will also be invited to join the Saturday Academy program. This group of students will account for the diversity of our school including English Language Learners, SIFE, and Students with Disabilities (SWDs). Following the Transitional Bilingual Education model (TBE) instructional model of our schools, students will be taught in English with extensive supports in Spanish. Students will learn to use laptops and Smartboards, and graphing calculators to facilitate learning. The students will participate in grade-appropriate high-school courses, CTE certification exams, work-based learning activities and internships which will provide students with the experience necessary to build their professionalism and fine-tune their work-related interpersonal skills. These experiences and skills will allow our students to gain entrance to a post-secondary university or secure stable and rewarding employment. Students will learn essential life skills in their regular curriculum, such as resume-writing, budgeting, and balancing a checkbook. The goal of this program is to build and enhance language skills and basic background knowledge of the world in order to reach their potential as both students and members of a complex society. While we have daily grade-team meetings which serve as a way to integrate and normalize instruction and best practices and as a way to discuss and remain updated on the latest research-based methods for providing high-quality instruction to our ELLs, the first Wednesdays of the month are also dedicated as school-wide planning days. These planning days provide a way to make the best of our limited resources. With only 3 certified language area teachers, these planning days are an essential component to our program. Because we have limited resources, these planning meetings will serve as a collaborative and professional critical work period for all pedagogues involved. During these planning sessions, the main focus will be strategies to maximize student potential and success through content-area knowledge and language acquisition, as well as strategies to on how to forge deep connections between professional and academic areas. These sessions will serve as a way for teachers to ensure that their planning connects with their content and grade teams, meets the appropriate language scaffolds and supports in the four modalities of language, and that all lessons are rigorous and Common-Core aligned in order to prepare students for college and career readiness. Our planning sessions will also include presentations on how to implement QTEL (Quality Teaching of English Learners) methods in our lessons. These planning sessions will inform both AIS and Saturday School sessions, by providing teachers with the tools that they need to make their content comprehensible to ELLs. The teachers will use the SmartBoard and worksheets during their AIS and Saturday School sessions. While these materials are distinct from what teachers use in their daily lessons, they are not divorced from the content. The teachers will use supplementary materials which serve to enrich and deepen students' understanding of the content in a more meaningful way, while also providing students with the support and structure that they need. All materials and resources are supplementary to daily instruction. (1) October 3, 2018: Planning (2) December 5, 2018: Planning (3) January 9, 2019: Mid-Point Assessments (4) March 6, 2019: Planning (5) April 3, 2019: Planning (6) May 2, 2019: Summary, closing, final assessments Below is the weekly overview and outline of our plan. There will be 20 four-hour Saturday Academy Sessions held from 9:00 AM to 1:00 PM and 29 after-school sessions held for one hour outside of regular school hours (which are from 8:00 AM-4:00 PM) four days per week 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information (Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday) from 4:00 PM to 5:00 PM. Saturday Academy will be targeted towards the 9th and 10th graders, and will be held by each of the four content-area teachers (Social Studies, English/English as a New Language, Science, and Math) for a total of 8 classes spanning both grades on Saturdays. Each class will have about 20 students. These areas and topics are broad enough to allow adaptation for all teachers involved. Each teacher will be planning and delivering a lesson aligned to their topic that allows students multiple opportunities to use and build knowledge. Some weeks (not included) are interrupted due to holidays, vacations, and the New York State Regents. Due to the frequency of the program, the school will use additional funding sources to supplement the cost of the Title III program. Week 1: October 15-19, 2018: Overview, Introductions Week 2: October 22-26, 2018: Content Themes (Main topics and ideas of the content area) Week 3: October 29-November 2, 2018 Language uses Week 4: November 5-November 9, 2018: Content Themes Week 5: November 12-November 16, 2018: Content Themes Week 6: November 26-December 1, 2018: Content Themes Week 7: December 3-December 7, 2018: Content History (Background of important historical information in content) Week 8: December 10-December 14, 2018: Content History Week 9: December 17-December 21, 2018: Content History Week 10: January 2-January 4, 2019: Content History Week 11: January 7-January 11, 2019: Assessment Week 12: January 14-January 18, 2019: Assessment Week 14: January 28-February 1, 2019: Content Topics (Current topics of importance in content) Week 15: February 4-February 8, 2019: Content Topics Week 16: February 11-February 15, 2019: Content Topics Week 17: February 25-March 1, 2019: Content Topics Week 18: March 4-March 8, 2019: Content Themes Week 19: March 11-March 15, 2019: Content Connections Week 20: March 18-March 22, 2019: Content Connections Week 21: March 25-March 29, 2019: Content Connections Week 22: April 1-April 5, 2019: Assessment Week 23: April 8-April 12, 2019: Content Themes Week 24: April 15-April 18, 2019: : Content Themes Week 25: April 29-May 3, 2019: Content Themes Week 26: May 6-May 10, 2019: Content Themes Week 27: May 13-May 17, 2019: Assessment Week 28: May 20-May 24, 2019: Assessment Week 29: May 28- May 31, 2019: Reflections All teachers teaching AIS will take regular attendance using a sign-in sheet and will submit these records, along with PowerPoint presentations and student worksheets to be kept on file. Our parent coordinator, Cyd Torres, will send a memo home to students in English and in Spanish notifying parents of both Saturday School and AIS. Additionally, Ms. Torres will give the students a permission slip to take home for their parents to sign to let them stay until 5:00 PM during the week and to come into school on Saturdays. The permission slip will also be printed in English and Spanish, and students will receive a copy that has both languages. Ms. Torres will also conduct phone outreach in the parents' native languages. AIS students will be identified by each content teacher. AIS classes will have no more than 12 students per content in one classroom for this program. The students will attend AIS once per 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information week with their ENL teacher and three times per week with their content teachers, who will receive ENL instructional support from a certified ENL teacher in QTEL methodologies. For Saturday School, the students will be grouped both by proficiency level and by progress towards graduation. The students will be in four different classrooms, where they will receive an hour each of Literacy, History, Mathematics, and Science instruction. The students will receive an additional hour of ENL instruction, as well as one period each of bilingual math, science, and social studies instruction in the 9th grade. The 9th grade students will receive 2 periods of instruction from a certified ENL instructor (Dual Certified Math and ENL and an ENL teacher), and the 10th grade students will receive 1 period of instruction from a certified ENL instructor and three periods of instruction from content-area teachers who have received training in ENL pedagogy. All teachers will implement Common Core-aligned curriculum as well as engageny.org curriculum both during AIS and Saturday School, in order to make it fully aligned with the Common Core-aligned instruction that students receive during regular school hours. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The Academy for Language and Technology is a public high school that must meet the needs of our 193 English Language Learners. Currently, there are three certified language teachers: 2 ESL and 1 Bilingual. There are also 3 teachers currently en route to receive proper language area certification. All of these teachers are participating in the Title III program. In order to better align instruction with the curriculum of the program, professional development will be conducted for all teachers involved in the program. Professional Development will be on going and will occur 6 times throughout the program for one hour. These PDs will be held by the two language area teachers (Kathryn Burke, and Michelle Deery) and will focus on language, language instruction, language development, and language assessment. The sessions will be aligned with the Common Core and will focus on how to differentiate instruction for the lowest-proficiency ELLs. These planning meetings will serve as a collaborative and professional critical work period for all involved. During these planning sessions, the main focus will be maximizing student potential and success through content-area knowledge and language acquisition, as well as strategies on how to forge deep connections between academic and professional areas. These sessions will serve as a way for teachers to ensure that their planning connects with their content and grade teams, meets the appropriate language scaffolds and supports in the four modalities of language, and that all lessons are rigorous and common-core aligned in order to prepare students for college and career. These planning sessions will provide all teachers with strategies on how to create lessons that have a measurable learning target aligned to the Common Core State Standards, Language Objectives, and activities for students based on QTEL (Quality Teaching of English Learners) methods. 7  Part C: Professional Development Each teacher will sign in as having received the PD offered by the school, and these sign-in sheets will be delivered to both Kathryn Burke (the instructional support specialist) and Tracy Berkeley, the school secretary. Both Ms. Burke and Ms. Berkeley will also maintain an agenda for each PD in a separate PD binder. Since these PDs occur within the regular school hours, they come at no additional cost to the program. 1: 2:00-3:00 PM, October 3, 2018: Planning: Language Acquisition 2: 2:00-3:00 PM, December 5, 2018: Planning: Language Development 3: 2:00-3:00 PM, January 9, 2019: Mid-Point Assessment: Assessing Languages 4: 2:00-3:00 PM, March 6, 2019: Planning: Language Use in four modalities 5: 2:00-3:00 PM, April 3, 2019: Planning: Academic Language vs. Social Language 6: 2:00-3:00 PM, May 2, 2019: Summary, closing, assessments Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents are heavily involved in our school community. At ALT we have an active Parent Association as well as an involved and effective School Leadership Team. We believe that in order to provide a high quality education that prepares students to contribute successfully as adults, the commitment and involvement of the parents is an essential component, along with the dedication and competence of our teachers.<!--{cke_protected}{C}%3C!%2D%2D%3Fxml%3Anamespace%20prefix%20%3D%20o%20%2F%2D%2D%3E--> We frequently provide meetings and orientations to parents to inform them of how they can support students' success in high school and future endeavors. Next year, we will provide two parent orientations for our incoming 9th graders, as well as school events for the rest of the parents in order to communicate to them not only importance of their involvement but the requirements for graduation and how to navigate post-secondary opportunities, such as college entrance requirements. Parent outreach in the parents' preferred language will be done by Cyd Torres, our parent coordinator, by phone, by mail, and at parent-teacher conferences. Ms. Torres will keep records of the outreach performed, as well as the other services detailed below. Parent engagement activities in students' education will take many forms including: With the continued support of our parent coordinator, Cyd Torres, we are able to communicate more effectively with parents regarding academic requirements and achievements, as well as important school information such as non-attendance days, AIS and Saturday School requirements, and Regents exam dates. Ms. Torres will mail letters home in both English and Spanish to parents to inform them of important dates and events, as well as informing parents at PTA meetings, parent-teacher conferences, and sending letters home with the students in both languages. -We facilitate a Saturday Academy for parents that will serve as a way to provide ENL services to our parents. The Parent Saturday Academy will be run by Xochilth Hernandez, who is a bilingual NLA teacher. 8  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities The class is theme based around citizenship in the United States and provides parents with language tools. Parents will learn BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) and get a course in basic technological tools. This includes knowing how to use Microsoft Office and PS and Mac operating systems. This class will also include parent trips to plays and other cultural events within New York City. Ms. Hernandez will be paid the regular per session amount of $50.13/hour, and so this program will cost $3,007.80. The parent Saturday Academy will run for three hours on Saturdays. The schedule is outlined below: 10/20/2018 Introductions 10/27/2018 BICS 11/10/2018, 9:00-12:00 BICS 11/17/2018, 9:00-12:00 BICS 12/8/2018, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 12/15/2018, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 1/5/2019, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 1/12/2019, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 1/26/2019, 9:00-12:00 BICS 2/2/2019, 9:00-12:00 BICS 2/9/2019, 9:00-12:00 BICS 3/2/2019, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 3/9/2019, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 3/16/2019, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 3/23/2019, 9:00-12:00 BICS 3/30/2019, 9:00-12:00 BICS 4/6/2019, 9:00-12:00 BICS 4/13/2019, 9:00-12:00 BICS 5/11/2019, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 5/18/2019, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 6/1/2019, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 6/8/2019, 9:00-12:00 Microsoft Office Suite 6/15/2019, 9:00-12:00 Closing, reflections, next steps -Throughout the year, we take field trips with the students to expand their knowledge and to broaden their understanding of technology and how it relates to College and Career Readiness. Parents will be invited to participate in these trips and learn with students. In addition, some parents will be asked to serve as chaperons when the number of students-ratio is higher than the available staff. -Research shows that involving parents in their children's education improves student achievement and behavior. The staff and faculty involved in this program offer a parent orientation to explain not only the importance of their involvement but the ways in which they can be involved. During Curriculum Night in September, we provide all parents with the tools to access our online grade book system, Skedula, in order for them to keep track of their children's grades and to be able to communicate more effectively with teachers. We reach out to parents through mail and phone, and offer translation services from one of our bilingual staff members at all times during the program. 9 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Academy for Language and Technology Borough Bronx School Number 365 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jose Vinales Coach Elena Rovalino ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Kathryn Burke Teacher/Subject Area Darling Ayala, Math Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Deery, ELA Related-Service Provider Kimberly Haynes, Sp. Ed. Superintendent Michael Alcoff Assistant Principal Jessica Kopp Coach N/A School Counselor Oscar Bolivar Parent Martha Fernandez Parent Coordinator Cyd Torres Field Support Center Staff Member Jose Ruiz Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics 1  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 322 Total number of ELLs 220 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 68.32% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Lang. Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 94 10 85 11 49 12 45 0 0 0 0 94 85 49 45 Tot # 273 0 0 0 0 0 273 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At the Academy for Language and Technology (ALT), we implement a school wide Design Your Own (DYO) periodic assessment system. With this type of set up, each teacher is able to create a skills based assessment of each individual student. Because we are a high school for newly arrived immigrant students, these assessments quantify the skill sets of our students in reading and writing in both native languages and learned languages. Teachers then take that data to plan and revise their individual lessons and set professional goals in order to measure student learning. Each DYO also includes a written component. This component is based on the content needs and specific writing skills. Students are given these periodic assessments in both English and Spanish, where applicable. Teachers then take this data to create goals to measure student learning in writing. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2  All new teachers are provided with a three-day orientation to the school and its systems and structures. As part of this orientation, teachers are given initial guidance on how to create, structure, and implement each DYO Assessment and how that information should be communicated with the students. Additionally, each new teacher meets weekly with the instructional support specialist, to review, among other things, DYO design and implementation. Each department also meets to agree on DYO design and implementation to ensure coherence and cohesiveness across grade teams. During the DYO administration period, teachers are given time to grade and record their DYO data during our daily team meetings. Before the DYO administration period, all teachers receive PD on analyzing their data and how to modify their instruction based on their scored assessments. Finally, DYO data is shared out at grade team meetings so that all grade team teachers know where the students fall and can determine commonalities of student need across contents. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We rely on NYSESLAT data, Regents data from the previous year, and our DYO data to determine baseline levels for our students. DYO data and Mock Regents data (gathered twice each year, in January and in April) is used to measure student progress throughout the year. These information sources are used to determine areas of need for our students, as well as update tiers and after school tutoring rosters. This data is also used to modify curricula as needed. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? All teachers are given time during our daily professional development meetings to grade and analyze Mock Regents data. Additionally, during these PDs, the school procedures to administering DYOs and Mock Regents is made clear to all faculty, and guidance is provided where needed to new teachers. New teachers also meet with the instructional support specialist weekly to discuss these changes and others that need to be implemented based on these data sources. This information is also made explicit to the students as they record it in their datafolios at the end of each three-month term. Based on this data, teachers modify seating charts, tiers, and the type and amount of scaffolds and supports which the students receive. They also make changes to AIS (Academic Intervention Services) rosters based on student need. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We rely on NYSESLAT and Regents data to evaluate the success of our programs. At the end of each year, when the results from these high-stakes assessments come in, modifications are made to summer school curriculum, rosters, and following years' curriculum to address the challenges and misconceptions faced by the students and to further support the students. For example, the data this year showed a 40% pass rate in the ELA Regents, which means that those students who did not pass will be placed into summer school. The ELA teachers analyze the sources and the areas on the exam where students did not score well, and these areas will be areas of focus during summer school. In relation to their proficiency levels, we see that ELLs with an English proficiency level below Transitioning struggle to pass the ELA Regents. These rules, however, do not apply in the same way to the Global History or the Algebra Regents, since the students have the option to take those exams in Spanish, their native language. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data from NYSESLAT and Regents is analyzed at the end and the beginning of each year in department meetings to determine goals across grades and action plans for meeting those goals. PD is provided to further support teachers in raising student achievement each year. Additionally, teachers are provided with the data for their incoming students sot that they can make the necessary modifications to their tiers, curricula, and seating charts. Part IV: ELL Programming 3  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. At ALT, freestanding ENL and integrated ENL is provided to students in 9th and 10th grades. The students are placed into heterogeneous classes, where they stay all day. Rather than the students themselves transitioning, the teachers transition from class to class. Each ENL teacher aligns her curriculum to one other content teacher teaching to a high-stakes Regents exam, therefore positioning her class as a support for another content. In 9th grade, the ENL teacher aligns her curriculum to the Living Environment curriculum. In 10th grade, the ENL teacher aligns her curriculum to the ELA teacher and therefore the ELA Regents; as the only high-stakes exam the students are required to take to graduate that is offered only in English, this allows the students exposure to the content in ELA twice in a day. In 11th grade, the students receive integrated ENL in ELA. They also receive standalone ENL; this curriculum is aligned to the ELA content. b. TBE program. If applicable. At ALT, we have several organizational models to deliver instruction. NYSESLAT data is used to create homogeneous classrooms in the 9th grade where students can receive support from both the teacher and their peers. In 10th, 11th, and 12th grade, learning labs are created based on Regents scores and English language proficiency. First, instruction is delivered to all students in learning laboratories that are designated TBE. In 9th and 10th grade, all students receive both standalone ENL services as well as integrated co-teaching with their ENL teacher and one other content teacher in a variety of content areas. Next, students with specific instructional needs are supported by push-in ENL teachers and receive special education services through the SETSS model. Finally, all teachers meet in both grade team meetings and content area meetings to work collaboratively on interdisciplinary units, lesson design and instructional delivery. Classes are created based on grade level by cohort; that is, 9th grade students are placed in 9th grade classes. In the 11th and 12th grade, students continue with their cohort, with the exception of a few students who travel to other classes only during certain periods of the day based on academic needs and Regents performance. Students are scheduled in the allocated time for ENL and ELA classes with licensed teachers in all areas. Block scheduling is used in all grades, where teachers are able to provide direct support to each lab as they take classes together throughout the day. Students receive tiered instruction in each class, and teachers are able to differentiate student learning activities for students at different level of English proficiency, literacy, and numeracy. Grade and department team meetings are conducted to allow for teachers to plan curriculum, lessons and review data for all students. c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In the 9th grade, where most of our students are at the entering and emerging levels, students receive home language support for multiple periods a day through content support. The students receive 300 minutes per week of standalone ENL in the 9th grade, as well as 60 minutes per week of NLA. In the upper grades students also receive home language support in the form of content area support. Bilingual teachers teach in the 9th grade, including History, Math, and Science. ENL teachers are in every grade. ELA teachers are in every grade. In 11th grade, all students receive 300 minutes per week of NLA services from a licensed pedagogue. Additionally, students receive 540 minutes of integrated ENL across AP Environmental Science, Economics, and ELA, as well as 60-180 minutes per week of standalone ENL. Students receive after school tutoring, Saturday academy, and summer school for additional support in preparation for ELA Regents. ELA is supported by content teachers 4  through literacy strategies and language development. All content courses are taught using ENL methodology and/or taught based on English proficiency level of class. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In science classes, instruction is delivered according to the English proficiency level of each learning lab. All grade-level classrooms are categorized as Transitional Bilingual Education and receive extensive support in Spanish, which varies depending on student’s levels and yearly progress. When applicable, additional classroom support is given to target students through After-school academic intervention services. Employed inquiry-based instructional approaches vary from Think-Pair-Shares, strategic groupings, differentiated instruction, DOK wheel, technology-rich lessons, scaffolding, and literacy-based activities. In history, instruction is delivered in either Spanish and/or English with differentiation and tiered instruction according to the English proficiency of the students in the classroom. In 9th grade students receive home language support through bilingual instruction. In the upper grades students are challenged with rigorous courses such as A.P. Government and provided with native language instructional supports in all grades. To facilitate understanding and comprehension, we use scaffolding, tiered instruction, and project based learning. Literacy strategies are infused within the content instruction. Literacy strategies such as annotated reading, Frayer models, and other research-based literacy practices are infused into daily instruction. Students receive instruction as a whole group, in small groups, and independently. In order to make content comprehensible, students are exposed to a variety of materials via technology. Students who are missing history regents in the upper grades receive academic intervention services after school with a bilingual history teacher. Literacy support is offered to all students through ENL and ELA instruction. All students receive ELA instruction with a licensed English teacher, and students in the lower grades receive ENL classes on a daily basis. Content is delivered using various strategies such as scaffolding, tiered instruction, RTI, QTEL-based literacy strategies, and differentiation as it applies to four language modalities (speaking, listening, reading and writing). All English classes are aligned to the common core curriculum, and all English teachers are trained in the utilization of the common core curriculum materials. All ELA teachers have implemented the Collections resources for their curriculum. Teachers use literature circles to provide students with additional reading support through small group instruction. In mathematics, the language supports are differentiated according to the English proficiency levels of students in that classroom. In 9th and in 11th grade, students take math class with a certified bilingual math teacher. In the upper grades, students receive math instruction in the language appropriate for their English proficiency level. Math teachers employ a range of instructional strategies such as manipulatives, calculator instruction, graphic organizers for guiding students through word-problems, tiered instruction, scaffolding, and differentiated assessments. All classrooms are provided with laptops for each student, translation dictionaries, SmartBoards, as well as mini classroom libraries with books in English at a range of grade levels, so that students can read books at whatever English level they feel comfortable. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Students are appropriately evaluated in their native languages using the Spanish LAB. Additionally, upon entrance, students are administered the NYSITELL exam to assess their knowledge of English, and placed in the correct instructional group as a result. Students then take the NYSESLAT every year. Teachers use this data to plan their instruction. Aside from these tests, students are also assessed periodically according to content. These content teachers use these assessments as a way to evaluate their native language instruction. At the end of the year, students are evaluated on their growth in Spanish using the ELE exam. Students receive the option to take regents in their home language, and many teachers provide assessments in both languages throughout the school year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 5  Students who are recognized SIFE receive additional support in the Academic Intervention Services and in Saturday Academy. In addition, content teachers provide regularly scheduled pull-outs with these students and after school tutoring. Teachers also meet in content teams and grade teams to discuss these students' needs, strengths, weaknesses, and progress and determine effective teaching strategies. SIFE students receive social-emotional supports during bi-weekly meetings with counselors, where they discuss progress to graduation, academic progress and transition to high school and college. SIFE students are arranged in both heterogeneous and homogeneous groups according to English proficiency. Instructors differentiate by using different tasks, texts, and final products. Students create specific goals for their reading and writing skills, which are updated every marking period, following a formative assessment. These goals are used to create action plans to support students achieve their goals. SIFE are promptly given diagnostic content tests to gauge target areas. After-school and weekend tutoring services are then provided to strengthen weak content-area knowledge. ENL teachers support SIFE students in the content areas through integrated co-teaching classes. Scaffolds are used on a daily basis in teacher-directed instruction, differentiated activities and worksheets, and during after-school tutoring. For newcomers and developing students, 9th grade students are taught some content area classes in their native language. As students progress, native language supports are gradually withdrawn to accommodate students' growing English proficiency levels. Teachers of newcomers are trained in ENL methodologies, and receive training in literacy practices from an instructional support specialist. Additionally, all new teachers receive one-on-one support from their assigned teacher-mentor or Ms. Burke, the instructional support specialist, on differentiation for newcomers and developing students in lesson and unit plans. All classrooms receive instruction primarily in English with extensive Spanish support; that is, materials as well as lessons are presented in both languages simultaneously. Teachers provide continuous periodic assessment (diagnostic, formative, summative, and predictive exams) to help focus and gauge the effectiveness of content, language, and critical thinking skills acquisition. All instructors gradually increase instruction in English during the second year of secondary education as dictated by English proficiency levels. By the third year of secondary education, students are expected to absorb, be engaged, and respond to lessons, activities, and written work requests primarily in English. Long-terms ELLs: Currently, our school does not have any Long-Term ELLs. Were we to receive some students who classified as LTEs, we would provide them with targeted intervention such as AIS services, Saturday School, as well as differentiated worksheets and readings. Additionally, for those students, we would closely monitor their English proficiency level to ensure that the students were progressing each year. Since our school is a TBE school, all students receive more Spanish supports in the 9th grade; as the years progress, however, the students transition to taking their classes in English. Teachers would provide continuous assessment throughout the year, monitoring not only their language development but their mastery of the content in all of their classes. For our former ELLs, we have continued to differentiate according to the students' specific literacy needs. Former ELLs have received small group, specialized instruction, and continue with increasingly advanced mainstream courses. We continue with our literacy practices and uphold high expectations, but also uphold the specific requirements for the Common Core. Targeted interventions programs for ELLs in ELA, math, social studies and science include regularly scheduled Academic Intervention supports for students scoring low on Regents and/or in-house periodic (DYO) assessments. In general, these pull-outs are conducted in English with home language support, depending on the needs of the students and the language in which the summative assessment will be given. In these subject areas, this occurs at least once a week throughout the year. Students who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT continue to learn from content area teachers capable of bilingual instruction when necessary. Furthermore, they are given support in advanced AP courses, and SAT and college preparation courses. Per our professional development programs for all teachers, scaffolded instruction is provided to commanding students as they deepen their understanding of content areas in English. Test accommodations for former ELLs are extended time and dictionary use for up to two years after they reach the commanding proficiency level. Additionally, former ELLs in the 11th grade receive both standalone ENL and co-taught ENL from Ms. Ortiz, the 11th grade ENL teacher. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? At ALT, we follow a SETSS model. Students are pulled out to receive SETTS with a certified special education teacher according to their IEPs. Special education teachers regularly meet and conference with teachers during Common Planning Time. Furthermore, all teachers include instructional models of RTI and UDL to support the learning of all students and ensure that each lesson includes multiple entry points. Additionally, all teachers use the online planning software Curricuplan, which the 6  Special Education teacher has access to. This means that she can view and download all lesson plans, PowerPoints, and worksheets and make additional modifications as necessary. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL-SWDs work with the special education teacher to determine goals and receive instructional support with content area classes. All teachers include RTI/UDL in their regular curriculum planning, and receive same language proficiency supports as all other ELL students. The special education teacher reviews the IEP and schedules students according to their individual needs. Additionally, the Special Education teacher meets with each grade team to review the IEPs and accommodations of each student so that all teachers are aware of every students' need. Finally, each IEP is uploaded on Skedula, our online grade book software, so that all teachers are able to view and download each students' IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All content area subjects offer after-school academic intervention services, Saturday school tutoring and small group instruction during the regular school day. These interventions are targeted at current and former ELLs, as well as SIFE students. 9th & 10th grade students receive at least one class of integrated co-teaching from one content-area teacher and their ENL teacher. During these co-teaching times, the ENL teacher targets ELLs who are SIFE or who are at the entering or emerging level on the NYSESLAT. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year A.L.T. will continue the implementation and development of its integrated technology courses. This year, all 11th grade students will take Advanced Placement Environmental Science and 12th graders will take A.P. Government. A four-week orientation for new ELLs is conducted every August at A.L.T. One-day orientations are also offered for students and parents throughout the spring. The Jumpstart program through Monroe College offers students and opportunity to receive college credits while still in high school. All ELL and former ELL students will receive a college advisory course once a week to facilitate college and career readiness. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All after school and Saturday school programs are designed to support ELL students. Because our school is 100% ELLs and former ELLs, these extracurricular programs are attended by 100% ELL and former ELLs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. At ALT, technology is embedded into all of our instruction. All teachers use the SMART boards and, beginning in the 2017-2018 school year and beyond, will be provided with laptops to make interactive presentations. All teachers will also be provided with PD on using the SMART Boards to their fullest capacity. Each grade receives a different technology class in order to prepare our students to be CTE certified. By the 11th grade, students are creating their own interactive presentations and are PowerPoint certified. Teachers will be able to implement a wide use of UDL as the technology brings the presentations to life. Two computer labs have been added to facilitate technology instruction, in addition to classroom sets of laptop computers. Additionally teachers will be provided with laptops to further enhance their instruction. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Classrooms are set up according to the NYSITELL/NYSESLAT results. Students are arranged in both heterogeneous and homogeneous groups according to English proficiency. Instructors differentiate by using different tasks, texts, and final products. In order to support native language for each program model, early grade students are supported with periods of content instruction in their native language. As students get older and begin to evolve through the programs, these native 7  language supports are seen through specific and targeted interventions, such as bilingual dictionaries and glossaries, as their classes are primarily in English. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. As mentioned above, 9th and 10th grade students in the TBE model receive some content support in their native language. 11th and 12th grade students receive targeted and specific intervention supports through after school intervention supports. This corresponds to their ages, levels, and placement in the program model. As students progress with their English proficiency, ESL scaffolding is gradually removed. This is reflected in the programming model of our school. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We co-locate with two middle schools. We share two gymnasiums, a library, a lunchroom, an auditorium, an outdoor recreational courtyard, a school psychologist, and a social worker. Additionally, we are lucky enough to house the Morris Heights Health Center, a school-based clinic. This clinic provides essential services to our students such as physicals and first-aid services. The principals of all three schools coordinate to ensure that all students have fair and equal access to these facilities, so that all of our students are supported in the way that they need. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). A four-week orientation for new ELLs is conducted every summer (July- August) at A.L.T. One-day orientations are also offered for students and parents throughout the spring. During these orientations, students and parents are given instruction in various aspects of the school, including student uniforms (dress code), overall academic comportment, and the school's expectations with regard to academic progress. Parents and students are also provided with interactive ways to learn about the school's online communication tools (primarily Skedula). These orientations are led by 9th grade teachers and school counselors. These skills are further developed with a series of workshops for parents offered by the parent coordinator, the community associate, and guidance office. During orientation students are also trained and exposed to the seven values of success and the school's core beliefs. Students who enter school after September are administered the NYSITELL and meet with guidance counselors with their families for their orientation. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish foreign language classes. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? As all teachers at A.L.T. work entirely with ELLs, professional development for ELLs is on-going and differentiated depending on teacher experience and needs. First, the school offers a week-long in-house professional development week in August that focuses on scaffolding, tiered instruction, and language amplification for new and returning teachers. New teachers, in 8  particular, are required to attend this conference; experienced teachers are strongly encouraged to attend. Throughout the year new teachers are offered support through Lesson Clinics with an instructional coaches and/or administrators trained in ELL methodologies. For teachers new to ELLs, these clinics happen at least weekly; some teachers receive more attention if necessary. Experienced teachers meet periodically with coaches, team leaders, and administrators, but are generally supported and lend their experience through interdisciplinary Common Planning Time and in school-wide content meetings--to address topics around CCLS, Language Development, Quality Curriculum, Data, and Scaffolding strategies. All teachers are observed formally and informally several times each year from administration. When these intervisitations occur, teachers use a "Walkthrough" tool created to address the special needs of ELLs in our classrooms. By checking through the various categories listed on this tool, teachers and administration alike can look at the various aspects of pedagogy for ELLs, determine needs, and address those needs through future lesson clinics and observations. During team meetings, teachers are given opportunities to brainstorm and work together on various issues regarding the ELLs in their classrooms. Together they create and monitor strategies for improvement. These heterogeneous teacher groupings give new teachers specific opportunities to interact and learn from experienced ENL instructors. Peer-to-peer intervisitations also occur regularly at A.L.T. During these intervisitations, teachers examine the way they are collectively meeting the needs of ELLs in their classrooms. Teachers often use the same walk-through tool that administration uses, but it may be modified by content teams to focus on a particular area of instruction. They provide feedback on scaffolding techniques and other forms of differentiated instruction. After these intervisitations they confer to find ways to further enhance their instruction. All teachers receive training in QTEL methodologies during common planning time. Finally, to support our CTE program initiatives in technology, several teachers have attended professional development sessions in the area of instructional technology. These sessions have culminated in the opening of our NAF Academy of Information Technology through CTE. Additionally, all teachers engage in lesson and unit plan review for alignment to the common core standards. Teachers provide one another with feedback and revisions to curriculum materials using tools such as the tri-state rubric to ensure all ELLs receive the necessary supports to engage in the more rigorous Common Core aligned lessons. Records of all PDs will be kept in a specially designated location of agendas, relevant handouts, and sign-in sheets. Non pedagogical staff participate in professional meetings educating staff in the needs of our ELL students, including providing students additional opportunities for academic enrichment after school, and access to College Now program, JumpStart program, and other college and career readiness opportunities. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All professional development is designed to support ELL students. Examples of professional development include training on QTEL methodologies, vocabulary instruction, reading comprehension, RTI/UDL, and examination of student data. All PD documents are created by the instructional support specialist, and maintained in a PD binder that is kept in the main office. As a result of the above described ELL related PD activities, all teachers of ELL including ENL teachers receive in excess of the required 15% and 50% ELL-specific PD. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All parents of ELLs are invited to Curriculum night in September to discuss the students' curriculum, learning goals, program goals, and language proficiency assessment results. Information is provided in both English and Spanish, with translators available to every teacher. Parents are also invited to each additional Parent-Teacher conference. These meetings are held with a student translator to facilitate communication between parents and teachers. Outside of these meetings, parents meet regularly with counselors and teachers to discuss their child's academic progress and language development. These meetings are held with bilingual counselors. In addition, our parent coordinator, Cyd Torres, and our community associate communicate regularly with parents about their child's academic progress and any other academic or behavioral concerns. Ms. Torres keeps 9  records of all phone outreach, and the guidance counselors, Yndira Alvarez and Oscar Bolivar, keep records of all one-on-one parent meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All parents are invited to participate in the school's parent association meetings, school leadership team meetings, and Saturday ESL classes for parents. These Saturday ESL classes are completely free and include outings as well as practical in-class language development. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jose Vinales, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Academy for Language and Techn School DBN: 09x365 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jose Vinales Jessica Kopp Cyd Torres Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Amanda Velez ENL/Bilingual Teacher Martha Fernandez Parent Darling Ayala Teacher/Subject Area Michelle Deery Teacher/Subject Area Kathryn Burke Elena Rovalino Coach Coach Oscar Bolivar School Counselor Michael Alcoff Jose Ruiz Kimberly Haynes Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related-Service Provider (Teacher, Sp.Ed.) Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/4/2018 6/4/2018 6/4/2018 6/4/2018 09/29/2017 6/4/2018 6/4/2018 6/4/2018 6/4/2018 6/4/2018 9/29/2017 6/28/2017 6/4/2018 1/1/01 1/1/01 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09x365 School Name: Academy for Language and Technology Superintendent: Michael Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Cyd Torres Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. All parents complete a Home Language Identification Survey during enrollment. Parents use the survey to indicate their language preference, and all information is recorded in ATS and emergency contact cards. Because the school is transitional bilingual, all parents indicate either Spanish or English. ATS reports of preferred languages and Blue Card data are updated every time the parent visits the school. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 3  Spanish Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 328 100.0 328 100.0 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families ELL enrollment and continued services letter September 2018 and as needed throughout the school year Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Published translated versions of the ELL enrollment, services and identification letters available on the intranet will be used. The timeline for ELL identification and service implementation as outlined in the 2018-2019 ELL Policy and Reference Guide will be used. Student Handbook September 2018 Bilingual School Personnel Monthly school calendar Ongoing throughout the school year Bilingual Parent Coordinator Field Trip Permission Slips Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements After school program information Saturday School information Field trip permission slips will be sent home with students as needed throughout the 2018-2019 year. Parent-Teacher notification letters will be sent home with students, as well as phone calls made home, in September 2018; November 2018; March 2019; and April 2019 After school program information will be sent home with students when the program begins in October 2018; phone calls home will also be made before the program begins in September 2018 and October 2018 Saturday School information will be sent home with students, as well as Bilingual School Personnel Bilingual Parent Coordinator and Staff Bilingual Parent Coordinator Bilingual Parent Coordinator 4  Parent ESL and Technology Class Information Letters in relation to health, safety, legal matters, disciplinary matters, entitlement to public education or placement in any Special Education, English Language Learner or non-standard academic program Curriculum Information phone calls home, in October 2018 when the program begins. Parent ESL and Technology Class information will be distributed at Curriculum Night on September 26th, 2018; this information will also be mailed home in September 2018. As needed and ongoing throughout the year Individual curriculum information will be presented to parents at Curriculum Night and Parent-Teacher Conferences on September 26th, 2018; November 29th and 30th, 2018; March 7th and 8th, 2019; and May 9th, 2019. Curriculum information will also be distributed to students in their classes by their individual teachers. Bilingual Parent Coordinator Published translated versions of letters provided by the Department of Education will be used in the event these letters need to be distributed. If no letter is available, bilingual staff will be responsible for translation. The language access website available on the DOE intranet will also be used for reference. Information will be translated and available to students and families by bilingual teachers, Parent Coordinator and Guidance Personnel regarding Curriculum Information. Translation services at these events will be provided by bilingual staff. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Curriculum Night September 26, 2018 Bilingual School Personnel Parent Teacher Conferences November 29, 2018 & November 30, 2018 Bilingual School Personnel Parent Teacher Conferences March 7, 2019 & March 8, 2019 Bilingual School Personnel Curriculum Night College Planning Visits Home/Attendance Visits IEP Meetings May 9, 2019 Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing Bilingual School Personnel Bilingual School Counselors Bilingual Attendance Teacher and School Support Staff Bilingual School Based Support Team, Bilingual School Counselors and Parent Coordinator 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. 5  In the event of an emergency families will be informed through a recorded message distributed in their preferred language by the automated phone ranger. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator, Ms. Torres, will turnkey translation and interpretation information and language access to all school staff in the beginning of the school year. All staff will be made aware of the resources available to facilitate translation including bilingual staff and the language translation and interpretation unit services. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents and families are made aware of their right to receive information in their preferred language through translated signage posted in the main office. Brochures, fliers and letters shared with parents will be translated in their preferred language. During Enrollment and throughout the year at events such as Parent Teacher Conferences, Parent Association and School Leadership Team meetings, parents will continue to be made aware of this right. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Schoolwide parent survey is conducted by our parent coordinator. Parents are also invited to provide feedback during parent association meetings and school leadership team meetings. 6 
