2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X367 School Name: ARCHIMEDES ACADEMY FOR MATH, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY Principal: APPLICATIONS MIRIAM LAZAR 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Archimedes Academy for MST 08X367 School Number (DBN): 320800011367 6-12 456 White Plains Rd, Bronx, NY 10473 718-617-5046 Phone Number: 718-617-7395 Fax: Miriam Lazar mlazar@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 8 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Miriam Lazar Joseph DiTargiani Lillian Garcia and Kareem Massey -PTSA Co-Presidents Principal Marina Jimenez tba tba tdd District Information Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230 Zerega Ave, Bronx NY, 10462 etobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-828-6655 Phone Number: 718-828-2760 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: - - Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Miriam Lazar Joseph DiTargiani Lillian Garcia Gerard Louis Marina Jimenez tbd tbd n/a Evelyn Ballence Michelle Montoya *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eileen Ponce Dawn Alarcon Barbara Hartnett Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Teacher UFT Member/ Admin CSA - - - - - - Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Archimedes Academy is a comprehensive 6–12 public school whose mission is to provide a rigorous, innovative, college preparatory education focused on math, science and technology applications while regularly celebrating the accomplishments of its diverse student body and culminating in a Regent’s diploma and the opportunity to earn up to a year of college credits. Regardless of whether students choose to pursue careers in the scientific community, it is imperative that schools provide them with a solid knowledge base in math, science and technology in order for them to take their roles as informed citizens in today’s society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Archimedes Academy is a beacon for mathematics, science and technology application in the Bronx. It is our belief that students learn best when they are engaged in demanding project-based curricula that activate their prior knowledge base. To learn, students must be challenged with a variety of rigorous tasks that require them to do more than memorize new sets of facts. Project-based and “hands-on” learning experiences ground new material into a real world context thereby providing a familiar backdrop for new materials. This approach encourages students to think creatively, apply concepts and actively construct meaning. Founded in the belief that children learn in unique and complex ways, this approach offers students an opportunity to conduct their own research and experiments in the pursuit of knowledge. The Archimedes approach will help students incorporate new conceptual schema into their existing knowledge base. Some of the most unique and important characteristics of our school are defined by our three core values and foundational pillars: 1. Technology integration into all disciplines – All classrooms are equipped with an interactive Promethean Board with speakers and short-throw projector built in, a document camera and desktop computer, made possible by Resolution A Funding. We have a laptop cart and remote response systems for every two classrooms. Teachers plan lessons that incorporate the use of technology so that students can interact with it throughout lessons, as well as share work with teachers and peers via Google Docs. 2. Inquiry-based/Project-based Curricula – Virtually all of the curricula we have selected are inquiry- and project-based such as CMP3, Active Physics, History Alive! and PBIS science modules. As often as possible, teachers incorporate the rigorous Common Core-aligned tasks from these curricula into their lessons. 3. Youth Development & Life Opportunity – Our students are grouped into four houses at each grade level and each is divided into two gender-based living groups (10-15 students max), typically led by a faculty adviser of the same gender. Advisers remain with their groups from grades 6 – 8 or 9-12, allowing the students to build a strong rapport with a trusted adult within the school community. Living groups meet every morning and afternoon in a homeroom-type fashion and also for a full block every week for advisory-type activities. Youth Development team members also meet weekly with MS and HS classes as needed for asset building circles to ensure that academic classes remain places where learning will take place. Notable collaborations and special initiatives we have in place include: 1. SoBro partners with our MS to provide out-of-school time and internship programs. 2. Syracuse University Project Advance (SUPA) allows us to offer real college courses for credit. 3. We are continuing to focus through multiple areas this year on improving student executive function. One of our school’s significant accomplishments is that we have successfully collaborated with the other two schools (one MS, one HS) on our campus to create a campus athletics department with 13 HS PSAL and 6 MS CHAMPS teams/sports, in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  addition to a few in-house intramural sports activities offered throughout the year across three sports seasons that we manage. We have our very own mascot—the griffin. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We have approximately 25% of our student population that has IEP's ranging from related services only, SETSS, ICT, to self contained. Our programming has all these configurations at all grade levels. We have approximately 11% of our population that are ELL's ranging from beginner to commanding - we have programming to support all of our students at every grade level. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. One challenge that we continue to face as a school community and continue to tackle is the level of parental involvement in opportunities designed for families. While we strive to offer meaningful opportunities to parents, we partnered with CEI-PEA to provide a series of interactive workshops in 2017-18 and will continue to do so in 2018-19, the level of attendance at parent functions has overall been low albeit that we did experience an increase. This challenge is one we are continuously working to improve upon and continues to serve as the focus of goal 5E below. We successfully launched and maintain our own school APP and response continues to be positive. We are looking to expand its access and use to a greater majority of our parents and students to capitalize on its potential. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. The MS Math curriculum as part of a districtwide initiative now consists of the NTN KEMS program supplemented by activities from our previous CMP3 curriculum. Utilizing the quarterly diagnostic results from the i-ready program will provide us with evidence of growth in Math scores as a result of these initiatives. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X367 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 686 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 77 77 9 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 32 18 7 4 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 80.6% % Reduced Lunch 9.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 59.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 11.26 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 78% 47% 56.8% 1.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Hispanic, ED No N/A 93 91 86.7% 1.3% 25.2% 28.0% 9.9% 1.0% 4 28% 6.1 17.5% 46% 69% 62% 70.6% 4% N/A No Yes Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed - - x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. QR 2016-17: Proficient: 3.4 Establish a culture for learning that communicates high expectations to staff, students, and families, and provide supports to achieve those expectations Findings School leaders and staff consistently communicate high expectations to the school community that conveys expectations for instruction, professionalism, and is connected to a path to college and career readiness. Impact School leadership consistently conveys expectations to the entire staff, provides training, and holds the staff accountable. The school community offers ongoing feedback to families and helps families understand student progress toward those expectations. We arrived at the self-rated HEDI ratings above by reflecting upon our school’s current strengths and areas for improvement pertaining to the Capacity Framework Element of Rigorous Instruction: Strengths: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  - Use of Common Core aligned curricular programs for all core subjects in the MS and HS. - Continuously increasing College-level course offerings to juniors and seniors through Syracuse University Project Advance (SUPA). - we added College Conversational Spanish to our line-up - All classes equipped with an interactive Promethean Board with built-in speakers, document cameras, desktop computer. - One laptop cart for every two classrooms replacing and increasing amounts each year . Areas for improvement: - Establish consistency in teacher use of instructional strategies, learning activities, and student groupings in order to improve high levels of appropriate challenge for all students at all achievement levels Based on our the above strengths and areas for improvement, as well as feedback from our most recent 2016-2017 QR, our area of focus for the Capacity Framework Element of Rigorous Instruction is to continue to improve teacher pedagogy using the Danielson Framework for Teaching by ensuring that it is informed by the instructional shifts, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that students produce meaningful work products. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, the school's CCLS-aligned curricula will be made accessible to all learners in all grades through an improvement in teacher pedagogy, leading to a 5% increase in average score on end-of-year student performance on the Regents for HS students and in an increase of 5% in students earning a level 3 or 4 on the NYS ELA exam and a decrease of 6% of students earning a Level 1. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers will receive ongoing feedback for components 3b, 3c and 3d of the Danielson Rubric, pertaining to questioning, discussion, engagement, and assessment, for their formal and informal observations throughout the year. Teachers will also receive feedback through the use of our Classroom Observation Checklist and Bulletin Board Rubrics. Teachers will receive targeted professional development both on-site and off-site on making curriculum accessible to all learners, including professional development on providing multiple entry points, scaffolding techniques, and designing tasks to engage all students. Co-Teachers will collaborate as needed during their weekly preps or professional work time to strategically review teacher lesson plans to ensure that the lessons and activities will be rigorous, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners, including students with disabilities and English Language Learners. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Ongoing Sep - June Principal, Assistant Principals Ongoing Oct - May Administration, outside providers, Network Facilitators, Teacher Team Leaders, Peer Collaborative Teachers Self-identified teachers through surveys and teachers identified through our observations ICT Co-teachers Ongoing Sept - June AP's How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Purchase of information booklets for parents about the Common core available in a variety of languages so that we can reach all parents. - already done and ready to distribute at parent meetings throughout the year Host a variety of parent nights/meetings for specific groupings of parents - ie Senior and Junior parent transcript nights(Administration and Senior or Junior advisers - Fall Q1), SUPA (college course info night) - (Admin and SUPA instructors - spring Q4) Fall Curriculum night, Fall and Spring parent teacher conferences, Individual Monday parent engagement meetings throughout the year - admin and various teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  All the above in order for parents to be active participants in their child's education by having an understanding of the requirements for promotion and the many pathways to graduation that are available for their child and to have the knowledge and ability to make informed choices for their child's education at AA and for future college and career. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Title I funds are used to pay for outside PDs - FSF and/or Title I funds are used to pay per session for teachers to participate in these evening parent sessions - title I funds are used to pay for Educational consultants to come and deliver specific parent PD's aimed at the above - TitleI funds are used to pay for job embedded coaching- NTN - There are no other costs associated because Professional work time and PD time are built in to our weekly schedules for both MS and HS staff. In addition, ICT Teachers can co-plan during professional work time and/or the majority of ICT teams have at least one prep period in common during the week. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Analysis of data from CCLS-aligned unit assessments and tasks, i-ready diagnostic assessments and/or mock regents assessments that are conducted each quarter and assessed using the NYS Regents rubrics or TC Writing Rubrics will reveal a 5% increase in student performance by February. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYS Regents Rubrics or TC Writing Rubrics or i-ready scores Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x - - - SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? QR 2016-17: Well Developed: 1.4 Positive Learning Environment Findings The implementation of the living group program, asset building circles, and the National Honor Society and student celebrations foster the school’s approach to building a safe and inclusive culture. School based support teams meets regularly and allows the staff to get to know the student well. Impact A safe and inclusive school culture fosters and values student voice to support students’ learning needs. The school has structures in place to ensure that each student is known well by an adult. We arrived at the self-rated HEDI ratings above by reflecting on our schools current strengths and areas for improvement pertaining to the Capacity Framework Element of Supportive Environment: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Strengths: -Students in the MS and HS are grouped into four houses at every grade level which are each led by an adviser. The adviser follows the students through grades 6-8 and 9-12. This is the one adult in the school who knows the student best. -We have a youth development team comprised of a Community Coordinator, a community associate, a SPARK counselor, the school social worker and guidance counselor, an at-large crisis paraprofessional, a MS dean and a HS dean to handle students’ social and emotional health development. -Living Groups meet for a full block 1x per week.A YD team member will meet with classes in asset building circles as needed. Restorative circles are used on an as-needed basis. -There is a positive school culture characterized by mutual trust and respect where a collegial faculty and staff support students’ learning. -The school conveys high expectations for learning by all staff and students and provides a supportive environment to maximize their learning. -On the NYC School Survey, 86 % of students indicated that they are safe in their classrooms at school school, and 83 % of students indicated that adults treat students with respect. Areas for Improvement: -Overall satisfaction of our school’s culture from parents, teachers and students was at 80% which was 6% less than the city average. -School performed in the 36 th percentile of peer range for the % of students earning 10+ credits in their 3 rd year. Based on the above strengths and areas for improvement, as well as conversations with students and staff, our area of focus for the Capacity Framework Element of Supportive Environment is to strengthen the capacity of teachers serving as Living Group Advisors to more effectively mentor students and provide students with guidance on social and emotional issues and planning for college and career. This year the Living groups for various grades meet at different times, on different days allowing for 1 advisor per house at the MS and 2 per house at the HS (i.e. less faculty serving as advisors - but those that really want to do this work versus all staff doing this work , some that were not as good as others, now we have the strongest and the most qualified doing this work) Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, staff will work with select teachers in order to strengthen their impact as Living Group/Grade Advisers, resulting in a 5% increase in the number of 1st and 3 rd year high school students earning 10+ credits as measured by the Progress to graduation tracker tool. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Living group advisers will participate in professional development each quarter for the purpose of improving their ability to conduct effective conversations with their advisees around credit accumulation, graduation and planning for college and career, and actively reading, interpreting, and goal-setting from quarterly report cards and transcripts. The school will continue to implement a school-wide program to increase students’ executive functioning for the purpose of helping them to develop key skills necessary to succeed in school, college and career. This year, the executive functioning program will include: Living Group advisers will monitor the return of required school forms, teachers will check and grade class notebooks, and YD team members will work with students on organizational skills during group circles. We are also contracting with Elevate education to provide a study skills curriculum into our 9th grade Living Groups School will use Apex courses in iLearn online course offerings being provided to students that are re-taking failed courses, for the purpose of increasing the level of engagement of students with blended learning opportunities and improving student outcomes. As part of the District-wide initiative student leaders will be trained in the Yale RULER protocols and turn-key to the entire student body. Our current asset building, Living group structure will be amended to include and embrace YALE RULER into what we do. The YD community coordinator reinfornce the YALE Ruler language to the students during ABC circles. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) HS Living Group Advisors Quarterly Oct, Dec, Mar, May YD Team, Guidance Counselor, HS AP and Principal, HS Data Specialist All students Ongoing Sept -June Living Group Advisors and YD Team, Elevate education providers - monitored by AP’s and administration Students in good standing who need to make up credits (Jan-June), All students needing to make up credits – Summer School Teachers and staff and then students January - August Content teachers working pro-rata or per-session as appropriate monitored by AP and Principal October - June Implentation team led by APO and YD coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Purchase of booklets with Homework Tips for parents in a variety of home languages so that we can reach all homes - already purchased - to be given out at various parent meetings throughout the year as needed Parent workshops - Skedula (online grading program), Naviance (college and career exploration and college applications), FAFSA - Admin, GC and teachers Host a variety of parent nights/meetings for specific groupings of parents - ie Senior and Junior parent transcript nights(Administration and Senior or Junior advisers - Fall Q1), SUPA (college course info night) - (Admin and SUPA instructors - spring Q4) Fall Curriculum night, Fall and Spring parent teacher conferences, Individual Monday parent engagement meetings throughout the year - admin and various teachers All the above in order for parents to be active participants in their child's education by having an understanding of the requirements for promotion and the many pathways to graduation that are available for their child and to have the knowledge and ability to make informed choices for their child's education at AA and for future college and career. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Title I Focus – for Skedula – online gradebook – 24/7 access for parents and students to monitor progress, grades and credits - Title I Focus & ANA Grant – for iLearn Apex Licenses – approved software for HS Course credit - Title I Focus – per session for teachers to monitor and grade progress and award credit for iLearn Apex online course completion - Title I Focus – for Supplies – agenda notebooks and paper – both for student use and for teacher use printing and distributing and displaying data progress to students - Title I – to cover partial salary of community associate member of YD team - There are no other cost associated because Living Group Time, ABC Circle Time, Professional work time and PD time are built in to our weekly schedules for both MS and HS staff. - Title I to maintain school APP - FSF to maintain domain for school website - CA4ALL MS and HS grants - Naviance program, college trips and parent nights Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Analysis of credit accumulation data at the conclusion of the Fall semester in February 2019 will reveal a 5% increase in the number of 1st and 3 rd year high school students on track to obtain 10+ credits, as compared to the Fall semester of the 2017-8 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. STARS Credit Reports or ATS RESI reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x - - 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. - 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. QR 2016-17: Developing : 4.2 Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focuses on improved student learning Findings Teachers collaborate in groups and inquiry teams that are beginning to implement the school goals. Teachers inconsistently analyze assessment data and student work for students they share. Impact Teachers engage in professional collaborations that is loosely connected to school goals. Teacher teams analyze assessment data and student, but this work does not typically result in improved teacher practice and progress towards goals for groups of students. Strengths: - Teachers regularly meet as department teams, sometimes with the assistance of BFSC content area specialists, Peer Collaborative Teacher or AP/Principal, to revise and refine their curriculum maps, adjust their pacing of instructional topics, better align their lesson and unit plans to CCLS standards and to incorporate more hands-on rigorous tasks. - In 2017-18 Teacher teams met for 6 cycles of inquiry LASW, using protocols, and making shifts in instructions throughout the year. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  - Teachers regularly meet as grade level teams to discuss specific students and develop plans to enable struggling students to access the curriculum and achieve successful outcomes. Areas for improvement: - Refine the school’s data distribution and discussion protocols to enable teachers to better pinpoint their individual students’ needs, strengths, and achievement on an ongoing basis. Based on the above strengths and areas for improvement, our area of focus for the Capacity Framework Element of Collaborative Teachers is to strengthen the collaboration of the department teacher teams to actively revise curricula on an ongoing basis, informed by classroom data, in order to more effectively meet the needs of all students so that they become as strong and as effective in their work as our leading HS ELA teacher team. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, teacher teams will meet 2-3x per month to review data and revise curriculum maps and pacing calendars for core classes, academic support periods and after-school program, resulting in an increase of 3% in the number of students scoring at Level 3 or 4 as measured by the Grade 6-8 NYS Common Core Math exams and a 4% decrease in students scoring at Level 1. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). NTN consultant will meet with Math teachers once per month during PD time as well as push into their classrooms to provide job embedded PD support in order to more effectively review classroom data and utilize it to make informed curricular changes in order to meet the needs of all students in their classes. Administrators and teachers will regularly collaborate to monitor and analyze data produced by the quarterly i-ready Diagnostics, NTN pre and post unit assessments School will offer extended learning time opportunities to all MS students after school and during Saturday Academy to help them better prepare for the State exams. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Math teachers Weekly – Jan - June AP Teachers involved in the Title I and Title III after-school program All MS Students quarterly Oct-June Teachers involved in Title I and Title III after-school program and AP weekly Teachers, MS AP Jan-April How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. by SBO we have MS parent engagement time every Friday Morning from 8:02-8:52am and for HS on monday mornings from 8:02-8:52am. Teachers or teacher teams set up meetings with parents to discuss student progress and discuss supports. We utilize School Messenger to send phone call notices home to parents We utilize Skedula to maintain 24/7 access to parents to gradebooks/grades and school attendance We utilize our School App to send push notifications home about events and activities and post notices in pdf format for them to access We utilize our School Website to post notifications, letters, information, supply lists, etc in pdf format for them to access and download- we utilize CEI-PEI (ed consultants) to design and deliver engaging parent workshops 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  - our COMPASS/SCONYC program SoBro which supports our MS students in after-school programming received a grant for an Adult Literacy/Adult HSE program that will be offered this year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Title I Focus – for textbooks to support ELT programming - Title I Focus – per session for teachers and APs to conduct after-school and Saturday Academy ELT programs - Title I and Title I focus - NTN Consultants for MS Math teacher PD - Title III – per session for teachers to offer three targeted ELL programs after school ANA Grant to fund Regents Review sessions and credit recovery programs for HS students in Fall and Spring Terms taught by Archimedes teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Analysis of data from iready diagnostics, CCLS-aligned classroom assessments and assessments utilized in ELT programs through February will reveal a 3% increase in the number of MS students who are on track to earn a level 3 or 4 on the Math exam and a 5% decrease of students on track to earn a Level 1 as measured by i-ready diagnostic assessment Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NY i- READY Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). - - x - SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We arrived at the self-rated HEDI ratings above by reflecting on our schools current strengths and areas for improvement pertaining to the Capacity Framework Element of Effective School Leadership: Strengths: - The administrative team successfully created an observation system last year that allowed us to provide specific actionable feedback to teachers regarding their practice particularly in domain 3 of the Danielson Framework. As evidenced by the trend entered into the Advance system for those domains for the majority of all teachers, there was improvement. We continued to refine that system this year and have seen growth in domains 3b, 3c and 3d at the start of this year as compared to last year. - The administrative team provided full block post observation feedback for all observations, formal and informal for the last 2 years and will continue to do so this year. Areas for improvement: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28  One area of improvement for school leadership is how well they strategically analyze the efficacy of instructional plans to provide a more coherent and effective approach to teaching and learning and also strategically plan the calendar of observation cycles Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, school administrators will provide targeted and specific feedback for Danielson's 3b, 3c and 3d, resulting in improved teacher practice resulting in an increase of 0.05 HEDI points of the school-wide average MOTP Score. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). School leaders will conduct formative and evaluative observations of all teachers according to a schedule, and hold feedback sessions with each teacher in order to support them with feedback and strategies for improvement in targeted areas. Middle school ELA and math teachers will attend on-site and off-site professional development opportunities throughout the year on analyzing and using data to revise curriculum and improve instructional practice. MS ELA and Math Teachers School leaders will organize and participate in half-day sessions with a NYCDOE TDEC each semester for the purpose of improving their ability to provide effective feedback, strategies, and action steps to teachers. Principal and AP 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Ongoing Principal, APs, Sept - June - approx 1 cycle per quarter Sept - June - monthly PC Teachers and AP's quarterly Administration Sept - June How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. - Use parent education funds to partner with CEI to provide parent workshops to help parents understand all of the various school reports and data Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Title I parent education funds to provide parent workshops through a partnership w/CEI - Title I funds are used to pay for outside PDs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Analysis of school-wide Advance data in February 2019 will reveal that the averages of components 3b, 3c, and 3d will increase by an average of 0.05 HEDI points school-wide. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance School Observation Detail Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We arrived at the self-rated HEDI ratings above by reflecting on our schools current strengths and areas for improvement pertaining to the Capacity Framework Element of Strong Family and Community Ties: Strengths: - Use of the Skedula online gradebook program, which allows 24/7 access to parents and students to monitor their assignments, grades, progress throughout each quarter and access to their entire data history (synched with ATS and STARS) of exam scores, HS grades/transcripts, Regents scores, credit accumulation, etc. - YD Team comprised of Community Coordinator, Community Associate, Parent Coordinator, MS and HS Deans, SPARK Counselor, Guidance Counselor and Clinical Social Worker to address any and all aspects of students’ social emotional health and provide referrals to outside agencies as necessary. - School App to send push notifications and post all relevant documents for easy pdf access for parents using their mobile devices - School messenger - robocall system to send out voice notifications to parents 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  Area for improvement: - The level of parental involvement in opportunities designed for parents is low, which may be due in part to outreach efforts that have had mixed results; - Based on the above strengths and area for improvement, the areas of focus for the Capacity Framework Element of Strong Community and Family Ties include building upon the work we already do with families to increase their participation in family events at the school to become even more active partners in their children’s education - we will increase our number of workshops for parents through parental education funds to inform them of credit and graduations requirements and transcript review specific by grade as well as workshops around the college applications process through our college access for all initiatives and increase the offerings of workshops from CEI for other parent interests such as housings and jobs and immigration issues etc. We have hired a bilingual Arabic teacher to help us with outreach to Arabic speaking parents (a growing population) and we are looking for a Bengali speaker as well to add to our staff bilingual abilities in French, Spanish, Haitian Creole, Albanian, Greek, Russian and others. All the above in order for parents to be active participants in their child's education by having an understanding of the requirements for promotion and the many pathways to graduation that are available for their child and to have the knowledge and ability to make informed choices for their child's education at AA and for future college and career. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, there will be increased family outreach and opportunities for parents to participate in the school community as measured by sign-in sheets, leading to families feeling more involved with the school and their children’s education and resulting in a 5% increase in the number of passed Regents exams in grades 9-12. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school will conduct on-site workshops for parents to coincide with progress report and report card distribution, such as accessing student achievement data via the school’s online Skedula gradebook, reading student transcripts, and using strategies to support their children at home. Parent Coordinator will work with administration to increase outreach efforts to parents using School Messenger, email, websiste, our school app and personal phone calls when necessary Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents quarterly Principal, parent coordinator Parents Sept-Aug - weekly Parent Coordinator, YD Team, AP’s, Tech School will continue to implement Apex course licenses this year with students needing to make up course credits for previous failures. Apex has 3 Tier access courses – one for struggling reader, one for on level and one honors level. HS Students with course failures Jan-August Fall/Spring semesters HS AP, Teachers, Data Specialist, Principal, Tech Students can access coursework and practice 24/7 at home and in school but can only take assessments in school under teacher supervision Title III after-school program will be provided to ELLs in three different target groups: reading intervention, HS Vocabulary and Skills Prep for Global Regents, and a newcomers group. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement ELL students November- ESL Teacher, AP June - weekly If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Sobro - COMPASS/SCONYC - after-school programs for MS students and parent workshops CEI - parent workshops to increase parent engagement Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. - Title I Focus – Skedula – Archimedes App, Hostmonster Hosting of School Website - NYSTL Software – One year site license School Messenger 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  - NYSTL Software – Castle Learning – One year site license including Method Test prep for ACT/SAT - ANA Grant/Title I – iLearn Apex licenses – 300 full catalog access licenses for 1 year Title III – after-school program for ELLs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant X 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-year analysis of mock Regents assessment data in each department will reveal that 5% more students are on track to pass Regents exams as compared to last year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mock Regents Exam constructed from old Regents Exams Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All MS students All MS Students Primary focus – all students that scored a level 1 or 2 on last year’s NYS Exam Previous failure of Regents Exam Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) MS - Specific targetedskills lessons from NY-readyfor each student based upon data from i-ready diagnostic All students expected to take Regents exam that semester Students needing to make up credits due to previous failures APEX online courses for remediation, various regents review bookwith targeted teacher reviews Mathematics All MS students All MS Students Primary focus – all students that scored a level 1 or 2 on last year’s NYS Exam Previous MS - Specific targetedskills lessons from NY-ready orNTNskills for each student based upon Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Differentiation within each group is delivered with each class level. Data based small group instruction: - Level 1 and Level 2 has 10 students per class. - Level 3 and Level 4 has 15-18 students per class. Students rotate to all core content grade teachers. Teachers each specialize in a specific skill so students rotate, working on all skills within a rotation cycle. Rotation cycle continue with new skill sets per cycle. Small Group Group Size varies depending on subject and need Computer Lab for academic subjects using iLearn licenses max 28 per session group, gym for PE – max 30 per session group Differentiation within each group is delivered with each class level. Data based small group instruction: - Level 1 When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) MS Skills periods during the day MS Academic Support – During the school day MS Test Prep – After school and Saturdays HS Regents Prep – some students receive during the day, some before or afterschool Before School, Afterschool or Saturdays MS Skills periods during the day MS Academic Support – During the school day MS Test Prep – After school and 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  failure of Regents Exam All students expected to take Regents exam that semester Students needing to make up credits due to previous failures data from i-ready diagnostic APEX online courses for remediation, various regents review books with targeted teacher reviews Science Social Studies MS - practice practical exam, review book and teacher targeted review HS -APEX online courses for remediation, various regents review books with targeted teacher reviews APEX online courses for remediation, various regents review books with targeted teacher reviews All MS students 8 th graders set to take Grade 8 NYS Science Exam or HS LE Exam Previous failure of Regents Exam All students expected to take Regents exam that semester Students needing to make up credits due to previous failures All MS students Previous failure of Regents Exam All students expected to take Regents exam that semester Students needing to make up credits due to previous failures and Level 2 has 10 students per class. - Level 3 and Level 4 has 15-18 students per class. Students rotate to all core content grade teachers. Teachers each specialize in a specific skill so students rotate, working on all skills within a rotation cycle. Rotation cycle continue with new skill sets per cycle. Small Group Group Size varies depending on subject and need Computer Lab for academic subjects using iLearn licenses max 28 per session group, gym for PE – max 30 per session group Differentiation within each group is delivered with each class level. Small Group Group Size varies depending on subject and need Computer Lab for academic subjects using iLearn licenses max 28 per session group, gym for PE – max 30 per session group Differentiation within each group is delivered with each class level. Group Size varies depending on subject and need Computer Lab for academic subjects using iLearn licenses max 28 per session Saturdays HS Regents Prep – some students receive during the day, some before or afterschool Before School, Afterschool or Saturdays MS Skills periods during the day MS Test Prep – After school and Saturdays HS Regents Prep – some students receive during the day, some before or afterschool Before School, Afterschool or Saturdays MS Skills periods during the day HS Regents Prep – some students receive during the day, some before or afterschool Before School, Afterschool or Saturdays 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) As identified by SBST or SIT or YD Teams Counseling group, gym for PE – max 30 per session group Small Group or 1:1 During the school day 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 12 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We provide academic supply packages and clothing packages. We ensure that the YD team checks in more frequently. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Hiring Committee ● Hiring Fairs, College Teaching Programs, TFA, Open Market resumes, etc.. ● Interviewee Questions that reflect an understanding of teacher best practices (DF, CCLS, meeting the needs of all students, belief in how students learn best, assessment practices, etc.) ● Mentoring to support new teachers, New Teacher Induction Committee ● Buddy teachers, Co-teachers, Lead teachers, Department Heads ● Intervisitations ● Professional development, teacher teams, department meetings ● Tenure preparation sessions ● External PD opportunities ● Accelerated courses and programs ● Support in teacher to administration certification 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Common planning time: Unit Plans – Performance Tasks and Rubrics ● Network PD for CCLS-aligned instruction ● Alignment to DF and best practices and strategies ● Modifications for SPED/ELLS and use of Paraprofessionals to support students ● Specific school and/or instructional Goals and/or Objectives related to CCLS and skills ● Ongoing monitoring and support to provide teacher and paraprofessionals feedback on their practice and its alignment to the CCLS ● Lesson and unit planning that encourages CCLS best practices and strategies, monitoring the progress, and review of student work to revise the process as needed 32 ● Ongoing revision of curriculum for alignment to CCLS and student achievement ● Continuous review of student work related to CCLS to modify practice and meet needs of all students ● Teacher feedback on PD and its effectiveness in the classroom – to revisit needed areas or revisions Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). n/a 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher teams review the effectiveness of school-wide and or common assessments ● Surveys are conducted on teacher knowledge, comfort, and abilities with specific strategies so appropriate PD can provided and intervisitiations can be effectively set-up to encourage specific assessment practices ● Teachers and teacher teams help design rubrics that effectively assessment students and modify and revise based on feedback ● Teacher teams also help create, align, and modify school grading policies ● PD always includes a reflection piece so that all voices are heard in terms of the assessment practices and the needed PD. ● Based on limited observation of Formative assessments in teacher practice for the 2013-14 SY, FAs have been reflected in the PD so that it is ongoing and teachers can demonstrate data collection, modification of instruction, and provide targeted feedback to students 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Federal Federal 581117 16979 X x 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) section 5 section 5 Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 86,846 0 12,366 0 4,577,714 X X X section 5 section 5 section 5 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Archimedes Academy in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Archimedes Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSAState accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Archimedes Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: * Rationale: The Title III after school tutorial program will support ELL students and immigrant students in their literacy skills, science, Social Studies, and mathematics skills needed for all content area classes based on the Common Core Standards. These services are beyond the mandated units of service as per C Part 154. * Subgroups and grade levels: There are seven subgroups: the first will support the middle school ELLs in the 6th to the 8th grade in their acquisition of their literacy skills and math skills needed in their content classes and support them in their upcoming New York English Language Arts and Mathematics state test. The second, third, fourth, and fifth group are the high school level ELLs in the 9th to the 12th grade; the tutorial program will support them with helping them develop the skills needed to pass their upcoming Global Regents exam, United States History exam, Algebra 1 Regents exam and Living Environment Science Regents exam. The sixth group will be a Dual Language Education program taught by a Spanish speaking instructor for the newly arrived Spanish speaking ELLs in their acquisition of basic literacy skills in English. The Dual Language program will also target the more advanced academically Spanish speaking ELL students that have strong literacy skills in Spanish. They will receive more challenging literature in both English and Spanish and will develop literacy skills needed to pass the New York State English Language Exams, LOTE in Spanish and in addition this support will also prepare them to take Spanish Language or Literacy classes in college. The final or seventh subgroup will be ELL students that are either SIFE or receive special education services that need basic English Language and literacy skills and need to develop basic phonological and phonemic awareness. There are a total of 98 ELL students that attend Archimedes Academy Using various sources of data it was determined by the team to offer six different and differentiated subgroups of ELL instruction. All the ELL student subgroups have different needs as they transition to becoming commanding ELL students. Data sources: NYSESLAT, NYSITELL, New York State English Language Arts and mathematics exams (middle school), previous Regent exams scores (high school), Scantron EdPerformance, grades, classroom made assessments and projects, class work portfolios and ELL students supplied class work . * Schedule and duration: The afternoon tutorial will be four days a week from Monday's to Thursday's, beginning the first term in October 2018 (upon approval ) and ending at the end of June 2019 until the Regent exams. The scheduled time for these three programs are from 3:42 p.m. or 2:52 p.m. for middle and high school students (directly after school) until 5:00 p.m. * Language of instruction: The language of instruction will be in English with native language support, except in the Dual Language Education program instruction will be in Spanish and the students will move towards English language acquisition. * Number and types of certified teachers: There will be four certified teachers, and of which one is an ENL/Special Education teacher, one a Bilingual/ Special education teacher, one a Special education teacher/math and science and one a certified science teacher. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Content Curriculum ELL students support This after school program will support ELL students in their current content curriculum classes. The program will provide foundation support and help with any educational gaps the ELL students may have in regards to the content. This support covers all four of the content classes of English Language Arts, mathematics, Social Studies and science. These after school classes will be taught by content subject middle school and high school teachers with an ENL teacher in a team-teaching setting. United States History Regents enrichment class The Title III tutorial will have one certified ENL teacher who is highly qualified in Social Studies who will be teaching a United States Regents enrichment class. This United States History Regents enrichment class will include an understanding of key words or vocabulary. It will also be utilizing differentiated instruction designed for ELLs students so that they can develop successful reading comprehension of their Social Studies reading material. ELLs students will develop an understanding of basic trends in United States history including the political, economic, ecological and cultural relations and processes that they need to understand in order to successfully pass their United History Regents. This class will also teach ELL students how to analyze documents and how to translate this knowledge into their writing. This class will be taught by an ENL teacher that is highly qualified in Social Studies. Global Regents enrichment class The Title III tutorial will have one certified ENL teacher who is highly qualified in Social Studies who will be teaching a Global Regents enrichment class. This Global Regents enrichment class will include an understanding of key words or vocabulary. It will also be utilizing differentiated instruction designed for ELLs students so that they can develop successful reading comprehension of their Social Studies reading material. ELLs students will develop individual time lines which will create a visual record of the various political, economic, ecological and cultural relations and processes that they need to understand in order to successfully pass their Global Regents. This class will also teach ELL students how to analyze documents and how to translate this knowledge into their writing. There will be translated curriculum materials as well as the use of glossaries, dictionaries and text books. This class will be taught by an ENL teacher that is highly qualified in Social Studies. Living Environment Regents enrichment class Title III will have a science teacher who will be teaching a Living Environment science class which will support ELL students who are currently taking a Living Environment class so that concepts are further clarified. This after school class will also be a Living Environment Regent’s enrichment class for those ELL students that can be currently taking the class in order to reinforce their skills and for ELL students that need to retake the Regent exam in order to relearn the material. This science Living Environment class will include an understanding of key words or vocabulary. It will also be utilizing differentiated instruction designed for ELLs students so that they can develop successful scientific understanding of the material as well as fill in any gaps of scientific knowledge that the ELL students may have. The scientific concepts reviewed will be genetics, cells, evolution, ecology and the human body. There will be translated curriculum materials and the use of glossaries, dictionaries and text books. This enrichment class will be taught with a science content teacher and a ENL teacher in a team-Teaching classroom. Basic Literacy Skills In addition, there will be a special education teacher who is also a certified ELA teacher, and a speech pathologist with a strong background in special education who will be providing explicit instruction in the literacy skills of phonological awareness and reading fluency needed for the special education ELL students. There is a group of ELL students that are non-readers. The ELL students are either SIFE or are special education students. The teacher and speech pathologist will provide a highly structured approach to 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information teaching, with explicitly planned lessons that will be designed to create basic language skills. All students in this program are in the Entering or Emerging Level. The targeted goals of the program are the following: * Phonological and Phonemic Awareness * Tier I words basic nouns and verbs * Basic sentences with subject-verb agreement * Basic punctuation rules; capitalization, end marks, intention * How to use language glossaries and dictionaries * Basic spelling words DOLCH, plural word spelling rules, spelling word based on Words their Way assessments * Paragraph writing: topic sentence, supporting sentences, details, concluding sentence. * The use of the Rewards reading program and parts of the Wilson Reading program All materials will be translated as needed. This class will be taught by an ENL / Special Education teacher and speech pathologist. Dual Language Education program There will also be a Dual Language Education program taught by a certified Bilingual/special education teacher for the newly arrived Spanish speaking students. These newly identified ELLs have difficulties with basic modalities of speaking, listening, reading and writing English. ELLs students will be in the Entering or Emerging level. The program will provide instruction in Spanish with transition into English. The program will promote academic achievement for ELLs. This program could be critical to improving educational outcomes and is consistent with the goals of increasing High School graduation rates with newly identified (ELLs) and meeting Adequate Yearly Progress under the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act. The program will help prepare the ELL students to succeed in their academic subjects and to learn English. The targeted goals of the program are the following: * Tier I words basic nouns and verbs * Basic sentences with subject-verb agreement * Basic punctuation rules; capitalization, end marks, intention * How to use language glossaries and dictionaries * Basic spelling words DOLCH, plural word spelling rules, spelling word based on Words their Way assessments * Paragraph writing: topic sentence, supporting sentences, details, concluding sentence All materials will be in both English and Spanish with the additional supports of glossaries and dictionaries. This class will be taught by a bilingual /special education teacher. This Title III after school will concentrate on higher order reading and writing skills which will be developed in the Dual Language Model. The two languages used for instruction our English and Spanish. ELL students will gain equal proficiency in both languages. As part of their higher order literacy skills ELL students will develop knowledge of how to analyze a text by having an understanding of figurative language, literary elements or literary techniques. They will expand and demonstrate their understanding of fiction and non fiction texts by being able to summarize, make inferences, draw conclusions and develop arguments by citing evidence from the texts. The assessments used in this program will be in both written and oral form, using class discussion as evidence of oral assessments. The curriculum will be developed from texts that have English and Spanish editions. This class will be taught by a bilingual / special education teacher. Mathematics Support The final ELL group will receive support in mathematics. This group will be taught by a special education teacher who also has a strong background in mathematics and science. There will be a mathematics class to support the middle school ELL students. This after school program will support the Common Core mathematics that is currently being taught in the classroom and help prepare the ELL students for the 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information upcoming New York State mathematics exam. There will be an additional support mathematics program for the high school ELL students, this will support and further enrich what they are learning in the classroom and help prepare them for their upcoming Algebra 1 Regent exam. Types of materials: For the ELL special education students,SIFE ELL students, entering or emerging ELL students below 3rd grade reading levels in middle school, the books and computer program that will be utilized are the MyOn computer learning program, coupled with the basic phonics books of The Rewards Reading Program, Explode The Code books 1 -5, Beginning Reading Activities published by Evan-Moor, Read & Understand Stories in English and Spanish grades 1 -5 published by Evan-Moor, Words Their Way published by Pearson and Phonics Centers Level A -Level C Short and Long Vowels Phonics Intervention Centers.With the exception of MyOn, all materials are supplemental and are targeted to meet identified needs of the ELL students. In the Dual Language Program for entering and emerging ELL students the Lengua Adicional Al Espanol (ingles) by Andres Garcia Cabral Martinez Books 1 - 4 will be used. All the materials are supplemental and are targeted to meet identified needs of the ELL students. For the Dual Language program that will be addressing more advanced students the literature of Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Isabel Allende and Mario Vargas Llosa among others will be used. All literature will have a English and Spanish language editions. All materials are supplemental and are targeted to meet the identified needs of the ELL students. For the ELL special education middle school students for their math instruction the book Crosswalk Coach Mathematics and Matematicas published by McGraw Hill will be used. In addition mathematics will include lesson from Engage NY and Algebra 1 Regent enrichment materials. These materials were supplied by the DOE. For the High School Global Regent and United States Regent enrichment sessions the book utilized will be Guerrilla Globe Regents Review, World History published by Houghton, Miffin and Harcourt as well as previous NY Regent exams. For the United States History Regent enrichment CommonLit.com, History of U.S. series by Joy Hakim, previous Regent exams and the current US History textbook. The text book was supplied by the DOE the individual lessons are supplemental. For the Living Environment after school program the books used are Biology by Miller & Levine published by Pearson and The Living Environment New York Regents Review Series. Also used will be units created for the class which will translated as needed. Both texts books are supplied by the DOE the individual lessons and units plans were created by a science content teacher based on New York State Common Core Science Standards. All Title III supplemental materials will be provided by the ENL classroom, none of these materials will be charged to the Title III program. ELL parents / guardians will be notified about the Title III after school program via written communication in their home languages. They have and will be notified about the Title III by individual parent /guardian meetings, phone calls, texts via telephone. All calls will be translated as needed. ELL student portfolio and assessments from the after school program will be maintained for one year. The portfolio will be ready for review by the ELL student's parents/ guardians, school administration for intervention data analysis as well as the Department of Education Division of English Language Learners and Student Support for intervention data analysis purposes. The ELL student attendance is taken daily. If an ELL student is scheduled to attend the program and is absent the parent /guardian will be notified in their home language promptly. All attendance records are maintained for one year. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  Part C: Professional Development topics to be covered   name of provider Begin description here: * Rationale: The ENL teacher has prepared a professional development program that is of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers' performance with ELL students within their classrooms. * Teachers to receive training: The teachers that will receive the training are the content teachers in both the middle school and high school, as well as special education teachers, the guidance counselor, paraprofessionals and the office staff. * Schedule and duration: The two hour training will take place during Term 2. * Topics to be covered: Currently at Archimedes Academy the ELL population is about 11% of the entire student population. The training will address the needs of the ELL and suggest various strategies in order to enhance their literacy skills in reading and writing. This professional development will provide Archimedes Academy staff with strategies to help ELL students develop English as well as ways they can support the ELL students' bilingualism. It will also review the New York State Commissioner's Regulations (CR) Part 154 regarding state laws for ELL students. In addition the New York State English Language Learner Policy and Reference Guide 2016 - 2017 will be reviewed. Copies of the guide will be supplied as needed. The agendas, PowerPoints, Professional Development lesson plan and attendance sheets will be maintained by Archimedes Academy and the ENL teacher for at least one school year. * Name of provider: Leslie Lee, certified ENL teacher The professional development will take place during regular school hours and therefore there will be no additional cost to Archimedes Academy. The provider receives weekly professional development as well as supplemental professional development provided by New York City Department of Education. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: * Rationale: Parental engagement activities are developed in order to communicate with families about the school and school programs as well individual students' progress. Studies have shown that more parental involvement in schools the higher the graduation rate of the students. The program which will be highlighted is Parent Power: Build the Bridge to Success. This program was developed by the U.S. Department of Education Office of Communications and Outreach. The program has partnered with the New York City Department of Education. All materials and handouts will be translated by the Language Translation and Interpretation unit part of the DOE. If possible there will be translators available to answer any questions 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities that parents or guardians may have. This program will assist parents / guardians with the transition of their children from middle to high school and beyond to the college or the work place. The Parent Power workshop will be a two hour event and it will be held after school hours. Records of the Parent Power will be a developed agenda, supplemental power point, and attendance sheet. In addition parent engagement includes ongoing communication with the parents/guardians of the ELL students attending the Title III after school programs. This communication will be on individual ELL students’ needs and progress in the after school programs as well as their performance in school. This dialogue will also allow for parental input. All activities, conversations, communication will be translated into the parent / guardian's home language. * Schedule and duration: Each of the three teachers Title III will meet with the after school ELL students' parents/guardians on a regular basis either in person, by phone or if needed email or text to discuss the students' progress and to obtain parental input. In addition there will be two formal parent orientation meetings, in November 2016 and April 2017 two hours each session. To maintain parental engagement there is also ongoing communication throughout the year including the summer school break. * Topics to be covered: The topics to be covered will be the ELL students' progress and needs in regards to their school performance. Parent Power will also offer suggestions in helping the students in their path to success. Parents are informed of school programs and events as needed and in translated editions and, if oral communication is needed in other languages, a translator will be found. * The parents will be notified by translated written communication, personal phones calls or texts. * Parent engagement records will be maintained by the ENL teacher and within the individual ELL student folders. * Because the parent engagement meetings will be held after normal school hours the two certified ENL/Bilingual teachers and the content teacher will be paid per session which will be a cost to the Title III program. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 12,366  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental. Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. per session for teachers for after-school program 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 12366 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Archimedes Academy Borough Bronx School Number 367 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Miriam Lazar Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Leslie Lee Teacher/Subject Area Erik Battery/Special education Teacher/Subject Area Esther Cho/MS Science Related-Service Provider Albertina Almonte special educ Superintendent Dr. Karen Ames Assistant Principal Barbara Hartnett Coach type here School Counselor Jillnee Beasley Parent Zoraida Padilla Parent Coordinator Patricia Appleton Field Support Center Staff Member Kristy De La Cruz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 733 Total number of ELLs 87 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.87% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Archimedes Academy for Math, Science and Technology Applications has a strong English as a New Language (ENL) program , as shown by the fact that about 38% of the English Language Learners (ELL) students went up a NYSESLAT Level in the 2016 -2017 school year. Archimedes Academy follows the English as a New Language program model and offers English Language Learners (ELL) students both push-in supports where the ESL teacher supports the ELL students directly in the general classroom setting, as well as pull-out support where the ESL teacher supports the ELL students on specific English language and literacy skills. In addition, Archimedes Academy offers after school tutoring four days a week in all the core subjects of English Language Arts, mathematics, social studies as and science for both their middle school and high school students. During the 2016-2017 school year the English Language Learners strongest academic growth in the NYSESLAT test was in the Writing Section of the test. ELL students are beginning to gain strength in their writing and that was demonstrated by 40% of 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  the ELL growth rate in writing. This is echoed in the ELL middle school student’s growth on the MOSL with an average of 53.8%. An additional indicator, Measures of Student Learning which includes high school mean growth percentile, was 58%. With literacy the forefront of the Archimedes Academy SMART goals this growth should increase in the coming school year. The second highest growth area in the NYSESLAT test was the Listening section. There was a growth rate of 17% in that section of the test. This means that ELL students are developing auditory strength and comprehension and can understand lessons if they are listening to them in a well-structured classroom. They are more able to catch details and are making progress inferring meaning. They are using clues and prior knowledge about a lesson to work out the meaning of what they are hearing. Reading Comprehension still remains a challenge for ELL students at Archimedes Academy with a 7% rate of growth. However, the staff is working on a unified SMART goal of literacy growth throughout the curriculum with the support of the ESL teachers. During pull-out to address reading comprehension the ESL teacher will utilize the RACE strategy, and teach vocabulary explicitly. This skill will be carried over into the classroom push-in ENL teacher who will support the understanding of Tier 3 content words which will be explained and translated. Both in the push-in and pull-out support, reading comprehension will be checked both informally and formally with more assessments and if needed the content will be reviewed. There are home language glossaries and content glossaries for each student in every classroom. To further address this issue the Title III after school program will have more focused literacy skills. There will be after school programs to address SIFE students with phonological awareness, and directly teaching and reinforcing reading comprehension skills for all ELL students. The area that has seen the least amount of growth is the Speaking Section of the NYSESLAT. About 3% of the ELL students showed growth in this area. Archimedes Academy has a large percentage of the ELL students that are in the Expanding Level about 45% of the ELL student population. The majority of these students are already Commanding or Proficient on the NYSESLAT test and therefore cannot receive higher scores. Archimedes Academy follows general trends of the ELL students that attend New York City Public Schools in that, if the ELL student has a high literacy rate in their home language , it is easier for them to transfer these skills into a new language. Archimedes Academy ‘s largest group of ELL students fall into the Expanding Level with about 35% in middle school and 53% in high school. While the ELL students that are Commanding or Proficient in the middle school is 27% , in high school the Commanding students are about 7% of the ELL high school population. Transitioning ELL level students make up 24% of the middle school ELL students, and 26% of the ELL high school students. Finally, in the Emerging Level it’s 10% in the middle school and 9% of the high school. Thus far this year we have 2% Entering Level in the middle school. Archimedes Academic has a large group of ELL students that fall into subgroups. About 31% of the ELL students in Archimedes Academy have disabilities. This breaks down to 35% of the middle school and 27% of the high school ELL students who have disabilities. Another subgroup in Archimedes Academy is the ELL students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) and they are about 7% of the ELL student population. The Title III after school program proved its strong success through its data in the school year of 2016 -2017. All of the ELL students that attended the after school on a regular basis went up a full level on their NYSESLAT test. In addition those students that attended the Living Environment Regent prep demonstrated their success by being 60% of all ELL students that passed that Regent exam. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? On a weekly basis content teachers meet to discuss progress of their students. For example, all of the high school English Language Arts teachers have a meeting, and all middle school science teachers have their own meeting. They develop as a team the benchmark, quarterly, and final assessments. Using the results from the assessments these teams develop strategies to help students make progress. These strategies and their impact are also reviewed and possibly revised. About once a month, teams meet as grades to discuss how students are progressing across the content areas in their grade. In addition, their are separate meetings for support staff were the special education teachers, guidance counselor and speech pathologist meet to discuss the needs of the special education students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The first measurement in the evaluation for ELL students in the ENL program is improvement of scores on the yearly NYSESLAT test. If the ELL student has not been tested on the NYSESLAT , the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB scores will be used. The ELL student should also be able to carry this knowledge across content areas and there should be improvement or 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  progress in their New York state tests and Regent exams. Because the ENL program is aligned with the content subjects the students should demonstrate improvement in their reading and writing in their content subjects. Additional assessments are performed on the ELL students like Scantron Ed Performance, and I-Ready, which are the computer based assessment used on the students. In addition MOSLs are used for every content area. If applicable last year's New York state tests scores or Regent exams are factored into the ELL student overall performance or progress. For the identified ELL special education students their assessment and baselines scores on their goals and in their IEPs are used. There are content related assessments like the TC Teacher College rubrics, and teacher created assessments. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Archimedes Academy has professional development meetings twice a week where student data is reviewed. Content teams develop pre and post assessments to determine growth. Individual teacher have pre and post MOSL's. The ESL teacher reviews ELL student progress regularly and is kept up on their progress through formal and informal meetings with their teachers. Through professional development and team and individual meetings interventions are developed and discussed as a team. Through this constant progress monitoring the team assess if the interventions are successful. If individual ELL students are not making the progress needed, a possible RTI strategy is developed. In addition the parent/guardian is informed and brought in a part of the intervention process. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Archimedes Academy is aware of the over identification of English language learners (ELLs) into special education is due to misinterpreting language acquisition as a learning or language disability. If needed the student is given intensive and individualized instruction through the RTI process. The first step of the process is Tier I Core Instruction. In Tier I ELL students will receive rigorous and evidence-based curriculum and the mandated ELL services hours of support. If needed by about 20% of the ELL students, Tier II is " Double Dose" of Instruction. The ELL student receives extra attention, activities and support which may include ELL services and after school instruction through Title I and Title III. If the ELL student fails to show improvement in Tier II the the team may recommend Tier III. Which is an Intensive Intervention with an individual instruction plan which addresses the ELL students needs through problem solving and targeted instruction. This plan may include small group instruction or 1:1 intervention. RTI for the ELL students is designed to increase educational opportunities for linguistically and culturally diverse populations. It compares the efficacy of different forms of instruction and builds a more effective instructional program to insure academic growth for ELL students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. On a yearly basis data is entered on ELL students is entered into ATS. This data includes the NYSESLAT/ NYSITELL/Spanish LAB scores in addition all New York states assessments and Regents scores. On the NYSESLAT 2017 test all data was reviewed as a school during professional development. Because of this review the Archimedes Academy team felt that all students not just ELLs need to improve their literacy levels. The SMART goals for Archimedes Academy for Math, Science and Technology Applications are literacy based and are unified in both the middle and high schools. For the English Language Arts Department the SMART goal is that 80% to 85% of students will be on grade level by the end of the school year. This is for grades 6-12 in English Language Arts. For the Social Studies department’s SMART goal it will be focusing their efforts on increasing students' abilities to effectively communicate and further argumentative positions utilizing documents to support their claims. To that end, the team will be providing our students with literacy strategies to increase comprehension of primary source documents, as well as implementing pre-writing programs to allow for the effective synthesis of information to support their claims. The sciences’ SMART goal is that the science department, grades 6 to 12, chooses science literacy as a SMART goal. By the end of this academic year, students will be able to read scientific literature (including articles, textbooks, graphs and data tables, etc.) on a grade specific level and "decode" the scientific information and be able to use and critique that information. Finally, the SMART goal for the mathematics department is across the grades all students will be working on showing work and explaining their process because that is what is required on state and Regents exams. High school will be concentrating on the 2 and 4 points Regents exam questions. This will increase the points they can receive on those questions. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63  Archimedes Academy has ongoing professional development once a week that regularly evaluates student data. Archimedes Academy analyzes the data as a team, and in content teams of ELA, mathematics, the sciences and Social Studies. Using the data the ELL personnel notice trends within the ELL population and offers strategies to better integrate ELL students in the classroom. In the stand alone ENL program the data informs the curriculum and lesson planning in order to meet the ELL students needs. In addition the ELL personnel supports professional development which includes language acquisition including differentiation and integration language and content for ELL students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In Archimedes Academy programs model currently offered is a combination integrated and stand alone model for ENL program. In this program model, ENL instruction is given in English by two state certified ENL teachers who are on staff full time. The stand alone model is instruction to help ELL students develop their English language skills so that they can be successful in their content courses. The integrated model is when the ENL teacher delivers instruction or support in the content classroom with the content teacher. In the integrated model the ENL teacher provides language acquisition and vocabulary support in a content classroom. In the stand alone model ELL students are grouped homogeneously by their proficiency level they are also grouped by their grade band, i.e., 6th and 7th graders in one class. and travel in one or sometimes when necessary in two class groupings per grade level. This enables these students to be scheduled to attend the mandated number of ENL minutes required in accordance with the CR-Part 154. In the integrated model ELL students are grouped in the heterogeneous (mixed proficiency level) but are the same grade level or class. The ENL teacher push-in to their classroom. In order to meet the mandated minutes of CR-Part 154 Archimedes Academy ELLs students are serviced in a combination of both stand alone model and the integrated model. As the ELL student becomes more proficient in English they receive their services through integrated model. In order to meet the CR-Part 154 minutes the ENL teacher which is dually certified in English Language Arts teaches the ELA class to the ELL students. The ELL students who attend ENL classes are given a grade for the class on the middle school level and must maintain a passing grade in all curriculum work for this class which is incorporated in their overall GPA. The stand alone model focuses on improvement of English languages skills in all four modalities including speaking, listening, reading and writing. The integrated model supports English Language Arts and Social Studies and the development of the use of academic language and understanding within these core subjects. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The state certified ENL teacher develops a schedule based on the ELL student most recent NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores. Students are placed in the appropriately selected program according to their proficiency level based on the scores received on the appropriate NYSITELL and NYSESLAT exams using the latest examination date. The Beginner/Entering and Low 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  Intermediate/ Emerging middle school students are serviced with 8 blocks or periods of 52 minutes classes of stand alone and integrated instruction per week for a total of 360 minutes per week. The Intermediate/Transitioning and Advanced/Expanding middle school students are serviced with 4 blocks or periods at 52 minutes per period of ENL integrated or stand alone instruction per week for a total of 180 minutes per week. The Beginning/Entering High School students are serviced with approximately 11 blocks or periods at 52 minutes each with combination of integrated and stand alone instruction per week for a total of 540 minutes per week. Entering and Emerging high school ELL students also receive English Language Arts for a dually certified ENL teacher. The Low Intermediate/Emerging high school students are serviced with approximately 8 blocks or periods at 52 minutes per week with a combination of integrated and stand alone services for a total of 360 minutes per week. The Intermediate/Transitioning and the Advanced/Expanding high school students are serviced with approximately 4 block or periods with a combination integrated and stand alone instruction per week for a total of 180 minutes per week. All Proficient/Commanding middle school and high school students receive 2 blocks or periods at 52 minutes of integrated support a week. A weekly schedule is developed for both ENL teachers to meet these minutes. In addition a chart is created to track all integrated and stand alone minutes for each ELL student. The schedule may be modified as new ELL students arrive or depart from Archimedes Academy. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In order to meet the demands of Common Core Learning for ELL students the ENL program works in close collaboration with the content area teachers in Archimedes Academy. The ENL teacher provide all teachers of ELLs with academic language and literacy professional development as well as strategies to help ELL students. The ENL teacher working with the content area teacher will also differentiate the curriculum in order to support the ELL student. In order to support the ELL student a system of support has been put into place which includes task analysis, time management, organization, communication, as well as progress monitoring. Because the Common Core requires that ELL students do more reading and writing, and to use evidence to back up their points they make in class discussions, quizzes, exams, Regents test and the NYSESLET test; the ENL curriculum is designed to support academic language and the ability to cite evidence from the text. The ENL program also helps identify native language resources to fill subject matter and conceptual learning gaps which will support ELL student learning. The integrated model supports English Language Arts and Social Studies and the development of the use of academic language and understanding within these core subjects. This is delivered by an ENL teacher that is certified in both ELA and Social Studies for the high school level. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL's are evaluated appropriately in their native language. Upon entry into school, the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB when required are administered to each student if a home language other than English is indicated on the HLIS. These exams are administered by a native speaker. Students are provided testing accommodations for all state exams including bilingual glossaries and a native language translator when required. ELLs students are also given the option to take the NY state exams in Spanish or other languages They can also take the New York Regent exams in their home language if it is available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) A SIFE ELL student is one that has had little-to-no literacy skills in their native language. They have had large gaps in their education and their education has been inconsistent in their native country. SIFE students are identified through teacher referral and based on an initial oral interview with the parents/guardians and the students regarding their level of education and specific schooling in their native country. Students who are deemed to be SIFE, by having 3 or more years of interrupted 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65  education, are then administered the Literacy Evaluation (LENS) to determine level their competency in literary and math skills in both the native language and the English language. Because SIFE students take longer to learn English than regular ELLs they need additional support. SIFE students can also give up easily and shut down and refuse to work. They also have a higher drop rate than regular ELLs. Because of their high needs they need more academic support as well, including their social and emotional needs. Because of these ELL students high needs they have the option to attend before and after school tutoring through Title I and Title III. b) All of our ELL’s including SIFE students, newcomers (0-3 years) all receive additional service including Native Language support within the classroom and across all content areas. All ELL students are given positive support in their Native language. Which includes being provided with Native Language support across curriculum and provided with bilingual dictionaries,translated curriculum access to bilingual staff and bilingual or native language texts when available. Also ENL curriculum is designed to draw out prior knowledge and literacy skills. The ENL teacher is aware and culturally sensitive to the fact that new identified ELLs come from different cultures and the teaching style and the curriculum may be different. Therefore because these ELLs have just begun to accrue new English literacy skills they will receive extra support services which have been allocated in the weekly academic schedule 6 to 12 times per week are also incorporated into their curriculum. c) Ell's (4-6 years) all receive additional service including extra support services and Native Language support which have been allocated in the weekly academic schedule 2 times per week. These ELL students often need to transfer their speaking proficiency to their ability to their literacy skills, particular in academic English. Students are provided with Native Language support across curriculum and provided with bilingual dictionaries, access to bilingual staff and bilingual or native language texts when available. All ELL's are grouped into homogeneous groups based on their proficiently level and can be serviced by grade level or the grade level close to theirs.for these mandated periods. ELLs are grouped heterogeneously for Academic Support (AS) periods that are taught by the ENL teacher. heterogeneous For the integrated services all levels of proficiency can be in one classroom therefore ELL students are serviced in a heterogeneous setting. Additionally, at risk students can receive additional services which might include one to one support, as well as additional support being available before/after school and Saturday school programs. This support focuses on reading comprehension and writing strategies within and across content areas. d) Long term ELL's are serviced based on grade and proficiency level. Long term ELLs students often demonstrate oral proficiency in English, but low academic literacy in both English and their home language. A high percentage of long term ELLs students 33.3% (2016-2017) have an IEPs, especially in the high school. Therefore, with the ENL support given there is a need for special education support as well. As with all ELL students they are provided with Native Language support across curriculum and provided with bilingual dictionaries, access to bilingual staff and bilingual or native language texts when available. Students are regularly administered written and verbal assessments in order to identify appropriate skill levels in all core areas of English Language acquisition, including Reading, Writing, Listening and Speaking. The student’s are provided with learning goals and the ENL teacher and the student are actively involved in monitoring and assessing their progress in the identified areas of need. Each student is provided with a personalized, self paced instruction and the curriculum which is aligned to the state standards using a range of teaching modalities to ensure that each student achieves maximum success. Student goals are evaluated and assessed periodically throughout the year. If they are special education students their IEP goals are aligned with their ENL reading and writing goals. Our long term ELL students receive integrated or stand alone ENL instruction between 4 and 8 times a week for 45 minute blocks or periods; depending on identified proficiency level and determined need. Most ELL’s also receive additional service including extra support services which have been allocated in the schedule. These include Academic Intervention Service (AIS) periods designated specifically for the ELL population, at risk services providing one to one support and the added support in Archimedes Academy after school and Saturday school programs with a focus on reading comprehension and writing strategies within and across content areas. These after/before programs include Title I, Title III, credit recovery, Regent Prep and Achieve Academy. Most of the long term ELL students do avail of the additional support services currently in place. E) Former ELLs that have tested Proficient/Commanding within the last two years are given testing accommodations.These accommodations include bilingual glossaries for all exams. For the New York state and the Regent exams, they have the option to take the tests in their native language if available. They are also given extra time on these exams which is time and half. They are also given 90 minutes per week in additional support from the ENL teacher in an integrated setting .Former ELL students also have access to bilingual staff and resources from the DOE. Former ELL students data is gathered and their progress monitored and strategies put into place if the student is not making the needed progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL instruction is given by a certified ESL teacher on staff. All ENL classes for the Beginner/Entering and Low Intermediate/Emerging level students uses the balanced literacy approach which incorporates read aloud, shared readings, guided reading, literature responses, and written reports and is grounded in all four language acquisition skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing. For ELLs with special education needs the strategies used are providing oral instruction, and allowing oral responses. Shorten or chucked lessons and more constant review. As well frequent progress checks and assessments. The lessons are given in written, visual and verbal formats so that the ELL learning disabled student can utilize as many of their sensory modalities as possible. Finally, the classroom is structured to cooperative learning activities so that ELL students of varying abilities can work together on a specific project or toward a common goal. All ELL special education students are given grade level curriculum, however the curriculum may be modified or the student may have accommodations that are in their IEPs. ELL students read a variety of genres including non-fiction, general fiction, plays, myths, legends, poetry, newspapers, and biographies. Multicultural literature is used in all grades. If available content materials like books will be in translated editions. ELL’s may also receive summer school instruction, resource room, counseling, peer tutoring, parent volunteers, extended school day services like Title I, Title III and Achieve Academy, standardized test prep, credit recovery, I-Learn, Regents exam prep. Other assessments include journals,class work, quizzes, exams, projects, interactive notebooks, classroom rubrics, and teacher observations. Archimedes Academy’s ENL program employs various modalities of instruction to ensure that the long term ELL students improve their linguistic and academic skills. Students are provided with native language support across curriculum and provided with bilingual dictionaries, access to bilingual staff and bilingual or native language texts when available. Academic Support (AS) periods are taught by the certified ENL teacher; these periods are designated specifically for the ELL population. Additionally, at risk services which provide one to one support and the added support before/ after school and Saturday school programs with a focus on reading comprehension and writing strategies within and across content areas 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses instructional flexibility to meet the diverse needs of our ELL population in the LRE by closely aligning instruction and specific programming with our ELL's individual needs. This affords ELL students an opportunity to further develop skills in various content areas. Archimedes Academy's instructional model incorporates the use of differentiated instruction and planning for ELL students and students with special education needs; this can also encompasses a team teaching model or ICT class with a general education and special education teacher working collaboratively within the classroom setting using a variety of instructional methods to assist students. During the IEP (initial, annual or tri-annual) meeting the team which includes the special education administer, services providers (speech and/or counseling), at least one general education teacher, translator, parent or guardian and student discuss the options for placement. The aim of placement is to place the ELL special education student in the least restrictive environment; however this is balanced with the ELL student needs. Our ENL teacher consults with content area teachers and special education teachers regularly and is involved in grade team and ELA team meetings to identify needs and support instructional methods for mainstream teachers to target the needs and IEP goals of the ELL population in our building. The ENL teacher knows the individual goals of each special education students and works with the team (including the student) to achieve those goals. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The ENL teacher works closely in conjunction with all content area teachers to ensure that the curriculum map is followed and ensuring that all students meet the Common Core Standards in all subject areas. Instruction is differentiated in the ENL classroom with a focus on vocabulary and concept development which reinforces the work that is being done in the content subject area classroom. Students are regularly administered written and verbal assessments in order to identify appropriate skill levels in all core areas of English language acquisition, including reading, writing, listening and speaking. The ELL students are provided with goals and are actively involved in monitoring and assessing their own progress in the identified areas of need. Each ELL student is provided with a personalized, self paced instruction and the curriculum is aligned to the state 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  standards using a range of teaching modalities to ensure that each student achieves maximum success. ELL student goals are evaluated and assessed periodically throughout the year. Based on the collected data the Archimedes Academy team has identified the specific areas most in need of improvement to be, the reading and writing skills of ELL students across the content. ENL program employs various modalities of instruction to ensure that the long term ELL students improve linguistic and academic skills. Some of the modalities utilized include the use of differentiated instruction, anchor reading and writing in all subject areas, project based instruction, explicit vocabulary study and writing instruction within and across content areas, literacy and content knowledge development, cooperative and pair share groups and the infusion of technology within the ENL and content area curriculum. In addition to the specific academic strategies in place, we have also greatly increased the social and emotional support for our long term ELL population within the school community. We have aggressively increased communication among parents and teachers across all content areas, including providing main stream teachers with adequate professional development and support to employ key language acquisition techniques for building linguistic and academic success for all ELL’s students, across all content areas. The ENL teachers regularly collaborates with all content area teachers discussing the use and helping to implement the use of these strategies within the content area classes and to identify specific areas of need within the content area 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Using Title III funding Archimedes Academy has developed 4 after school programs: Regent's Prep, Bilingual ELL support (Spanish), Bilingual mathematics support (Spanish) and a Reading Intervention Program. The Title III Global Regents Prep class was designed to review concepts that were taught in the ELL student’s Global Social Studies class. There is an emphasis placed on the writing sections of the Regent exam. The ELL students are taught specific skills in reading the academic text as presented, how to select information within the text to support their conclusions. A further emphasis is placed on their writing mechanics so that their thoughts are clear. Using the Title III funding a Bilingual program was developed to help the beginning and emerging ELL students. This program is targeted to help the ELL students acquire basic English language skills. In addition there is a b The mathematics program using ENL techniques is designed to support ELL students understanding of grade level mathematics and to clarify a deeper understanding of the math material when it is presented in the general education classroom. The program emphasize mathematical word problems and vocabulary words used in mathematics so that the ELL student will have a deeper understanding. The final program using Title III funding is the Reading Invention program. This program is designed for ELL students that are struggling readers that have low literacy skills. This program is designed to meet the needs of the special education ELL students and the SIFE ELL students. The program is grounded in phonemic awareness, decoding, vocabulary acquisition and reading comprehension. Additionally, all ELL students have access to Archimedes Academy teacher staffed after school program with additional Saturday support in both English Language Arts and mathematics. For the school year 2017-2018 Archimedes Academy will start a new program for struggling high school students called Achieve Academy. SoBro is attached to Archimedes Academy as well, and it runs an after school program. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? There are no programs for ELLs that will be discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are encouraged to attend all school activities. All program fliers and notifications are provided in the appropriately translated format. ELLs are afforded equal access to all supplemental programs in our building this includes Title I and Title III programs. The Title I program provides more intensive instruction in the core subjects of math and ELA. The Title III programs include a transitional bilingual program, Reading Invention targeted at ELL students, math instruction and Regent Prep. ELL students also have access to SoBro and Achieve Academy. Most ELL’s receive additional academic support including extra support services which have been allocated in the block schedule and provides students a minimum of twice a week support in Math, ELA and all content areas. These classes have been heterogeneous grouped for all ELL students in each grade level and includes the Academic Support (AS) periods. Additional supplemental programs include at risk services providing one to one support and the added support before/after/during lunch periods on an informal basis. Most of the long term ELL students do avail themselves to the additional support services currently in place. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. As a school with a technology vision at it's core, all classrooms including the ELL students are given equal access to the use of classroom computers which have been fully equipped with Internet access and several reading and writing intervention programs including as well as several other educational programs in the areas of science, Computer programs include I-Ready MyOn, and Mody Max. ELL students are encouraged to utilize these programs as part of the core curriculum and to help aid their learning across all content areas. Teachers use a differentiated model of instruction in their core content areas includes the use of PowerPoint presentations, interactive smart boards, graphing calculators, and classroom lab tops. Teachers across all content areas use interactive technology as mentioned above, on a daily basis to deliver differentiated instruction and to aid learning for the ELL population. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program at Archimedes Academy ELL's are evaluated appropriately in their native language. Upon entry into school, the NYSITELL is administered to each student if a home language other than English is indicated HLIS. Students are also given the Spanish LAB if they are Spanish speakers. Students are provided testing accommodations for all state exams including bilingual glossaries and a native language translator when required. If an exam is available in the native language of the ELL student they are allowed to take this exam. Bilingual glossaries and content glossaries are given to each student to use daily as needed in their classes. Bilingual glossaries that use specific academic language in subjects such as math, chemistry, and world history are also provided to the ELL students. There is also bilingual teaching staff and paraprofessionals available at all times. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Archimedes Academy continuously monitors ELL student progress which includes student work, formal and informal assessments, and test results and systematically adjusts instructional planning based on a wide variety of evidence and data. Using this data, resources are allocated and contingency plans are developed. If the ELL student is also a special education student the special education team develops a plan to support the individual student's needs and learning style. The ENL teacher works with the special teacher and the speech therapist to monitor the student 's progress. In addition, attendance records are maintained on CAASS and SESIS to ensure that the ELL students are attending their required services. If not, parents/guardians are contacted and appropriate steps taken. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? While Archimedes Academy shares a building (co-location) with two other schools; it does not share academic based resources. It does share common areas like the cafeteria and auditorium, but that does not effect ELL student services. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). If a student is newly enrolled ELL student, the ENL teacher will reach out to the parent and begins a relationship of collaboration. Data from the NYSITELL, Spanish LAB, SIFE oral interview, SIFE MLS and NYSESLAT is taken into account the student's schedule is developed. The parent/guardian is informed about the ELL proficiency level orally and in written form by the Entitlement and Continued Entitlement letters in the ELL students' home language. A meeting is set-up with the student and their parents to discuss the students needs. A dialogue is established with the student's teachers and they are informed about the student's testing accommodations, and ELL status and level. The student is furnished with a native language glossary and a schedule of their services. If the ELL student is in need of transitional and emotional support the school counselor provides additional support. If the ELL student has suspected learning disabilities a RTI plan is developed with a team headed by the Special Education Administer. The parent/guardian is informed about all after school programs like Title I and Title III after school programs, and ELL student is encouraged to attend. ELL parents/guardians are also informed about the yearly ELL parent meeting in their home language. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  Currently, Archimedes Academy offers the Spanish language as a language elective. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Currently, there are no dual language programs offered at Archimedes Academy. The majority of parents have selected the ENL model for their children. However if a parent selects a dual language program, the school maintains a list of the approximate number of requests per grade and when we have the appropriate number of students as required by CR-Part 154; which indicates that in grade K-8 when there are 15 or more ELLs of the same language in two contiguous grades and that in grades 9-12, when there are 20 or more ELLs in any single grade; at that point we will then notify the parents that a dual language program will be made available. If there are not enough students to form a Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) program, parents have the option of transferring their child to another school that has a TBE program in the district/region. If they choose not to transfer their child, their child will remain at the school and be placed in the corresponding ENL program. All communication with parents/guardians is offered in both their home language and the English language. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The professional development plan for the ELL teacher at Archimedes Academy is to obtain a TESOL certificate. The ELL teachers attends twice weekly PD at the school and this PD includes literacy development. Both ESL teachers attend professional development specially for English Language Learners provided by the DOE to meet their 18 hours yearly requirement by the state of New York. The DOE Division of English Language Learners and Student Support offers educational resources and professional development as well as outside organizations such college institutes provide valuable professional development for our teachers. Teaching staff regularly utilizes professional development in order to enhance their common core teaching. The ENL teacher with the assistance of the Special Education administrator develops and present professional development sessions that are held twice a year. The professional development includes ELL students’ rights including accommodations, strategies that can further the ELL student’s growth within the general classroom, differentiated lesson planning that includes the ELL student. The strategies that are highlighted in the professional development include vocabulary translations with definitions, word walls, graphic organizers (translated) home language textbooks if available and the importance of student using the ELL student glossaries. To further support the teachers at Archimedes Academy the ENL teacher familiarizes them with the services and training within the DOE, that can help the teachers in their content area develop specific strategies. The training also includes information about the Language and Translation services that are available. With this additional training the entire staff becomes capable at implementing effective ELL strategies in their classrooms across all of the content areas. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  The ENL teachers attends twice weekly Professional Development Meetings with the Archimedes Academy staff at these meetings ELL student data is shared. Based on the data strategies are developed by the team these interventions will be put into place so that the ELL students will be prepared academically to transition to higher grades. The guidance counselor supports individual ELL students, and helps the school as a whole by the educating staff on age appropriate development and education. At Archimedes Academy the ENL teacher develops professional development for all teaching staff and school administrators. Because a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the required professional development hours for all teachers prescribed by CR Part 154.2 must be dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. The ENL teacher with the assistance of the Special Education administrator develop and present professional development sessions that are held twice a year. The professional development includes ELL students’ rights including accommodations, strategies that can further the ELL student’s growth within the general classroom, differentiated lesson planning that includes the ELL student. The training also includes strategies to help the ELL student improve language acquisition.To further support the teachers at Archimedes Academy the ENL teacher familiarizes them with the services and training within the DOE, that can help the teachers in their content area develop specific strategies. The training also includes information about the Language and Translation services that are available. In addition, field staff from the DOE Division of English Language Learners and Student Support are invited to present professional development to the Archimedes Academy staff. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Archimedes Academy highly values parent and community involvement, and takes active steps to ensure that both are a part of the school’s culture. Parents are invited to activities, workshops, and the use of the resources from the Office of English Language Learners at the DOE in their native language. Parents are also invited to seminars on topics that concern ELL parents like college preparation for their children, again these invitations are in their native language and in English. Parents also collaborate with the ESL teachers in ensuring progress for their children. Parents are given regular updates on their children's progress and are invited to an annual meeting to specifically review the ENL program and its goals. The ESL teachers are available to meet with individual parents/guardians to discuss the ELL student's needs and goals and help develop strategies and interventions to help the ELL student. The Language and Translation Unit will be available as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL Parents are encouraged to attend school performances and academic presentations such as science fairs, talent shows as well as sporting events and picnics. Communication of these events will occur through: A monthly calendar and reminders sent home with the ELL students. All ELL parents are encouraged to support their students by letting them attend after school tutoring learning and enrichment opportunities. Parents are encouraged through the PTA to come to school and become involved in community activities. ELL Parents receive reminders and updated information through the use of school messenger in their home language translated in the parent's preferred language either by school staff or the Language and Translation Unit of DOE. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  2018-19 SCEP-FF 72 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Miriam Lazar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Miriam Lazar Title Principal Barbara Hartnett Assistant Principal Patricia Appleton Parent Coordinator Leslie Lee Esther Cho Erik Battey Dr. Karen Ames ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08x367 School Name: Archimedes Academy Superintendent: Dr. Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary)Noris Matias school secretary Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. As new ELL students enter Archimedes Academy parents go through a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS). If the home language is not English the new student is given the NYSITELL or LAB-R (if applicable) to determine the students' proficiency level in English. This testing will determine if they need services and if so,at what level. Archimedes Academy then reports this information about their ELL students into the Automate the Schools’ (ATS) Bilingual Education Student Information Survey (BESIS). Additional source of information about the students home language are student emergency cards (Blue Cards), parent-student surveys, parental / guardian requests in regards to communication when student is enrolling. Beginning in November of each school year, the Division of Information and Instructional Technology compiles this data, which is reviewed and verified throughout the year. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali (Bangla in Bangladesh) Chinese Fulani GA Hungarian Hausa Mandinka English Spanish Soninke Urdu Ukrainian Wolof 10 35 1 1 1 1 0 1 707 236 1 1 3 2 1 3.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0 0.1 70.63 23.58 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.1 3.7 1 1 1 1 1 1 703 235 0 3 3 2 1 3.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 70.23 23.48 0 0.3 0.3 0.2 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish 32.19% Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Archimedes Academy Vision and Mission statement September School Calendar September /January Field trips permission slips monthly as needed After school notification and permissions slips monthly as needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use DOE intranet template(s) for covered languages: we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We use DOE intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. We use DOE intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non- covered languages when needed. We use DOE intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide IEP special education services monthly Parent-teacher meetings monthly Parent - teacher conferences twice in a school year Meditations as needed Emergencies / medical or additional as needed interpretation service(s)? Over the phone interpretation, in-person interpretation with school staff, vendor /CBO/Volunteers Over the phone interpretation, in-person interpretation with school staff, vendor/CBO/Volunteers Over the phone interpretation, in-person interpretation with school staff, vendor /CBO/ Volunteers Over the phone interpretation, in-person interpretation with school staff, vendor/CBO/Volunteers Over the phone interpretation, in-person interpretation with school staff, vendor/CBO/Volunteers 2018-19 SCEP-FF 77  ELL Students yearly meeting October Over the phone interpretation, in-person interpretation with school staff, vendor /CBO/ Volunteers 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Use Language Line to inform parents they can call the school in their language (use a phone script). Use the LAC LL line as well as staff members that speak the student's preferred language. As well as in-person interpretation using school staff. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Field access will train during a Professional Development all staff members on Language Access Chancellor's Regulation A-663 Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Archimedes Academy is committed to providing for the needs of our ELL student population. Archimedes Academy collects data through the Home Language Identification Survey and reports this data to ATS and BESIS. During the HLIS the parent/guardian is informed of the Language Line and email. This data on home language and parental language preference is reported to ATS and BESIS. All school written correspondence uses the DOE templates or vendors/CBO/volunteers or school staff that proficient additional languages to translate the information. All school correspondence is written in the parent's/guardian's native or home language. Parental meetings with school staff are arranged so that an interpreter is present at all times. All parents are given the opportunity to collaborate with Archimedes Academy in their native language via an interpreter.The Archimedes Academy team develops a Language Allocation Policy every two years and incorporates all of the current data available on the ELL population.The following are given to the ELL parents/guardian in their preferred language Parents Bill of Rights and a Parents’ Guide to Language Access every school year. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 78  Parent/guardian communication is a priority at Archimedes Academy. Because we value parental opinion each year the parent survey is distributed. It is given to the students in their living groups and the living group teacher is responsible for its return. Translation copies are given as needed. The data obtained from the survey is used to develop a better school. The needs that are expressed by parents can be turned into professional development or addressed by other means such after school for students or a more interactive web page and so forth. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 79 
