2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X375 School Name: THE BRONX MATHEMATICS PREPARATORY SCHOOL Principal: DYON ROZIER 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Bronx Mathematics Preparatory School 320800010375 6-8 School Number (DBN): 08x375 456 White Plains Road, 4 th Floor, Bronx, NY 10473 718-542-5063 718-542-5236 Phone Number: Dr. DyonT. Rozier Fax: Email Address: drozier@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address: Counseling In the Schools Dr. Dyon T. Rozier Cleopatra Williams Derrick Brown Paula Paredes Teresa Lewis Melinda Morales . . District Information Dr. Erika Tobia Superintendent: 1230 ZEREGA AVENUE, BRONX, NY ETobia@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-828-6653 Phone Number: 718-828-6239 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx NY nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-741-8895 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Dyon T. Rozier Derrick Brown Paula Paredes Maya Lourdes Melinda Morales Cleopatra Williams Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10  Check if SLT Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Teresa Lewis AdemolaAkesode Yolanda Perdomo Melinda Leach Cleopatra Williams X X X X X X TEACHER TEACHER PARENT PARENT PARENT Parent PARENT Parent Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Staff/Parent/Other Contributor Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Dyon T. Rozier Cleopatra Williams Paula Paredes 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Represented Principal Community School Director PA Designated Co-President Signature (Blue Ink) 11  Cesar Rosa Melinda Leach Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Parent Coordinator . Parent Title 111 Representative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Signature (Blue Ink) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. The Bronx Mathematics Preparatory School is a middle school with 250 students in grade 6 through grade 8. The school population is comprised of 33% Black, 64% Hispanic, 3% White, and 6% Asian students. The student body also includes 13% English language learners and 37% special education students. Boys account for 57% of the students enrolled while girls account for 43%. The average attendance rate for the present school year (2017 – 2018) is 87.68%. We are committed to our core values of Trust, Teamwork, and Success! We believe that these core values serve as the foundation to our vision of "Building a Community Trustees. Our mission is to improve the learning outcomes for all our students. Additionally, our mission is to create a stable community of respectful, independent and motivated learners who value education, are confident in their abilities, feel academically and emotionally supported and are college and career ready. Through structured learning with real word connections we provide students the best opportunity to solve real life problems, set their own goals, and measure their progress using research based strategies to meet their diverse needs. The framework for Great Schools element in which our school has made the most progress this past school year and will continue to strengthen in the new school year: ● Strong Family Community Ties: Our partnerships enables us to support the students, families, and the overall school community by providing students with ongoing academic and enrichment services. One of our Community Based Organization partnerships supports our science curriculum (Urban Advantage-Real World Connections through Museums and trips, Our lead Community Based Organization , Counselling in Schools with the support of a Community School Director will work to strengthen and unify these partnerships as we continue to work as a Community School. ● Supportive Environment: We are at the developmental stages of implementing a Positive Behavior Intervention System, Positive Behavior Intervention Systems (PBIS) system that is marked by incentive based activities for students. In addition, we provided a week long summer institute professional development program for new staff and teachers to inculcate them in the systems and structures that are aligned to our school goals and vision. Through the expanded time initiative we will be able to provide students with a plethora of after school programs that included both arts ( i.e. boxing, drumming, social awareness ( i.e student council, mock trials) and academic programming (i.e i-READY). We will continue to strengthen and utilize our community based organizations like Counselling in Schools, Abundant Life, Sports and Arts in School Foundation. ● Collaborative Teachers: Structures and protected times are in place for teachers to meet in grade teams and department teams on a weekly basis to meet during common planning time. Teachers incorporate the use of accountability forms to document professional development, evidence of data analysis, and/or discussion focus. During meetings they analyze student work from both formative and summative assessment data to identify student 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  misconceptions and areas of challenge and concern. We are working on providing more opportunities for distributive leadership and improving the systems that are in place. We believe that our ongoing work with teacher teams will leverage our teachers collaboration and data-driven decision-making in our pursuit of improving student outcomes. We will accomplish our mission by ensuring that our students are provided with a safe, nurturing environment with supports for their social emotional development. Using a Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS), Bronx Math will promote positive character, academic achievement, and encourage students to live by our middle school motto: I am Worth It! I am Valuable! I am a Rising Star! I am Pure Potential! I am a Youth @ Promise! I am a Giant Thinker! I am Important! I am Significant! I Matter! I Can! I Will! I Must! Who I am Does Make a Difference!!! These are our beliefs about student learning and social-emotional growth and development. Achieving Academic Success Students must be able to apply high rigor knowledge in an authentic and real world setting. Therefore, it is important that we provide them with an education that is stimulated by rigor and relevance. We focus on conducting periodic assessments using I-Ready ( Math and ELA), Pre and Post Unit Assessment ( Math and Science) and On Demand writing (ELA, Social Studies) to identify struggling readers and writers. Implement systems to support targeted small reading and writing group instruction (i.e., integration of access code and i-Ready), centering our goals around literacy development in all subjects, and at our school creating a school wide professional development plan. All teachers are asked to be teachers of literacy. By using the Teacher's College Reading/Writing curriculum to strengthen our literacy instruction across the school, we have an acute focus on developing our literacy program this year. In addition to our core curriculum reading and writing program, Passport to Social Studies we will be using KEMS -The Key Elements to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  Mathematical Success and Inspire for Science. Students spend time in each of their major classes over the course of the year focusing on reinforcing academic strategies, skills, and concepts. Structures and times are in place for both vertical and horizontal teacher teams and department teacher teams to meet weekly during common planning time. Teachers incorporate the use of accountability forms to document professional development, evidence of data analysis, and/or discussion focus. During meetings they analyze summative and formative assessment data to identify student misconceptions and needs based student groupings. We are working on providing more opportunities for distributive leadership and improving the systems that are in place. Also, to incorporate structures and times for horizontal grade team meetings. Treating Yourself and Others with Respect Our students are expected to understand and commit to practicing the core values and behavior (according to a strict Code of Conduct) that reflects the highest behavioral expectations for staff and students. Character values are taught in Advisory. Helping others to Succeed. Research shows that collaborative learning improves the educational outcomes for students. Therefore, both students and staff are provided the opportunity to learn and work in cooperative group settings. In addition, we provided a week long summer institute for new staff and teachers to inculcate them in the systems and structures that are aligned to our school goals and vision. Through the expanded time initiative students will participate in well rounded after-school programs that include both arts and academic programming in small group settings. In addition, we partner with our building council to support a collaborative, competitive sports program after-school. As a "Community School" we have entered into a partnership with community based organization, Counseling In Schools. Through a collaborative program we will work to provide and/or identify resources within the school or outside of the school that will address our students social, emotional, and academic needs. In addition, our school day will be extended to include academic enrichment activities designed to expand our students learning opportunities and support their moral and physical development. Through the Expanded Learning Time initiative we are able to provide students with a well rounded program that provides supplemental learning opportunities to students through academic enrichment and project based learning in a S.T.E.A.M. (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math) program. In addition, we partner with our building council to support a collaborative competitive sports program during the after-school hours. Elements that remain most challenging are. ● Collaborative Teachers: Although teachers meet, we are still developing a systematic approach for consistently and routinely reviewing students' work. Data analysis and its alignment to next steps in instructional practice is the direction we are moving in. ● Rigorous Instruction: Although we were able to develop coherent CCLS-aligned curriculum maps and unit plans for all core subjects, scaffolding and multiple entry steps provided are not consistent for all learners including ENLs and SWDs. We will support this by implementing digging deeper in our teacher teams and continuing to use the "Looking 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  at Student Work Protocol" to analyse student work with an emphasis on differentiating for all students. The specific needs of the school's special student populations are performing below grade level and a large percentage are transient. As we continue to evaluate our needs assessment we will use the following indicators and benchmarks to identify our RCEP goals: ● Attendance ● Rigorous Instruction ● Collaborative Teachers ● Student Average ELA Proficiency Rating ● Student Average Math Proficiency Rating ● 9 th Grade accumulation of credits by Former 8 th Graders 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X375 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 240 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 7 34 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 8 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 99.0% % Attendance Rate 97.9% % Reduced Lunch 14.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.5% 65.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.72 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 20.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A YSH NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 5 32 87.7% 0.8% 37.5% 28.3% 2.5% 2.5% 4 27% 7.8 13.2% 35% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YSH N/A N/A YES NO NO N/A N/A YSH NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X . . . Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection: In the Quality Review we were celebrated and praised for "High Expectations." The reviewer stated, "The school maintains, a system of accountability toward expectations amongst staff and helps families understand student progress toward these expectations." During the PPO (Supervisory Visit) Dr. Ames stated, "I am very pleased with the school's overall warm and inviting environment. Students' quiet passing in the hallways in between each class validated the work around climate and culture you and your team have been focused on...and speaks to the high expectations we collectively communicated to your students (1.4 and 3.4)." Furthermore, we are implementing a comprehensive and targeted professional development plan to improve teacher pedagogy with the creation of CCLS aligned curriculum and plans that support diverse student learning is needed . Strengths: Based on the statement of practice strengths our school and classroom environments are conducive to supporting a positive learning environment. Systematic rituals and routines have been established to help support student learning. Portfolios are created for every student in which students file mastery work, all assessments, and reflections and goal setting information. Teachers use a P.O.E.M. (point of entry model) and Flow of the Day where the daily agenda is posted and students know to come in take out their notebooks and document current headings, and then engage in targeted, purposeful “Do Now” activities. In addition, every classroom is outfitted with technology resource supports in the form of an interactive whiteboard, Elmo, and mobile laptop cart. We have adopted curriculum in each of the content areas, which include, CMP3-Math and PBIS-Science, Core-Curriculum Social Studies and whole 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  class novel studies. In addition, we provide students with opportunity to take regents classes in both Integrated Algebra and Living Environment. Each year 75% of our students meet proficiency in these classes. To support pedagogy and instruction, an annual professional development plan for Monday extended time that reflects broad school wide goals and topics is created and revised as necessary throughout the school year. Needs Improvement: Based on the 2018, Quality Review the reviewer recommended that we continue the process of "delving deeper" into the analysis of individual student data. By working consistently and continuously with our teacher teams we aim to systematically meet and collaboratively analyze student work and data would enable teachers to engage in this process and to identify strategies for targeted instruction that could meet the needs of individual students. In addition, it will allow teachers to create clear learning objectives for individual students to engage students in thoughtful, well planned practice and activities throughout the lesson. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Bronx Math School Wide Instructional Focus If teachers use students data to inform instruction, then students will engage in learning experiences, which include opportunities for peer partnerships, where they problem-solve and justify claims through discussion and close reading. Our vision for rigorous instruction includes the implementation of an ELA curriculum that is supported by a readers and writers workshop model. The readers’ and writer's workshop model of instruction is supported by The Teacher's College reading and Writing Project with integration of strategic small group with a focus on reading strategies that will focus on independent reading, guided reading, and conferring. Our Math guided workshop Model will be supported by Engage NY and CMP3. Teachers will incorporate exploration activities where students can “discover” rules and journal writing will allow students to provide reflections on their thinking. In addition, conferring, formative assessments, and pre/post unit exams will be used to support differentiated instruction for students. As for social studies we use Passport for SS teachers will continue to integrate strategic small group reading strategies and incorporate theme based novel reading to further support the content. Implementing the Social Studies practices will also be important to ensure that we are building students’ content knowledge. The science curriculum will be supported by CBO partnerships with Omni-Learn and Urban Advantage which will help to promote rigorous inquiry based learning, provide students with real world connections to science, and help them to understand and become advocates for sustainability. Instruction at our school will be guided by best practices that are aligned to the Framework for Teaching that identifies the “must haves” for planning, environment, and instruction. Consistency will be supported across our school faculty through the use of teacher led instructional rounds with feedback, purposeful inter-visitations with feedback, and maximizing the use of administrative resources to develop cycles of targeted instructional supervision. In addition, annual assessment calendars, unit curriculum maps, and horizontal and vertical team calendars will be created as tools to support consistency. This work will allow administration and teacher teams to constantly engage in professional learning and inquiry work led by results oriented protocols for looking at student work and analyzing data to ensure 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20  that actionable next steps are created to address student needs and provide for multiple entry points of learning for students. ELA annual assessments will include (but are not limited to), TC on-demand writing assessments, running records, summative assessments and have students work on a process piece of writing for each unit. Math- formal assessments, summative assessments (i.e., exit slips and quiz), pre/post unit exams, Science - summative assessments, pre/post unit exams. The test coordinator will collect data and distribute results to teachers, teacher teams will engage in the inquiry process to analyze data and use that data to co-plan mini lessons and explore new strategies to address student needs .The test coordinator will process school wide assessments and disseminate data. In an effort to build teacher capacity, teachers will scan and collect data from pre and post unit exams and will follow a protocol for analyzing the data at department team meetings to identify next steps towards set goals and modification of instruction and/or curriculum if needed. In addition, these assessments will be used to for purposeful groupings and student specific scaffolds, and individually targeted instruction. Furthermore these assessments will be use to progress monitor and help us support our all of our students. During our Expanded Learning Time students will be able to engage in Regents preparation in both Living Environment and Integrated Algebra. In addition, remediation support will be provided for our students with disabilities, grade 7 students in the both ELA and Math and all others identified as in need of remediation support services. Class sizes will be monitored which will promote smaller student to teacher ratio and improved ability to address individualized needs. In addition, throughout the school day academic Interventions for targeted students will be supported by i-Ready online intervention program in both ELA and Math. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? To improve students' overall academic achievement of our diverse learners (ENL's and SWD's). I have implemented Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project(ELA), KEMS and EngageNY (math), Our school also uses adaptive software for Math and English--I-Ready. This we believe will increase students' reading, writing and mathematical practice skills. MyOn is an online library that is available in all students' languages. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? To make all student college and career ready our school-wide instructional focus is aligned and driven by the instructional shifts and CCLS which encourages both reading, writing, critical thinking, problem solving, and speaking across disciplines. Our curriculum introduce students to the staircase of complexity through our tasks, text based answers and analysis and Academic vocabulary while balancing literary and informational texts. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? It is our expectations that the students will receive instruction that are standards based, meaningful, and engaging. The teaching and learning that is delivered will be given by teachers who have been professionally develop and operate from a learning lens that supports a coherent set of beliefs about how students learn best. This lens of how students learn best is informed by the instructional shifts and Danielson Framework for Teaching, aligned to the curricula, engaging, and meets the needs of all learners so that all students produce meaningful work products. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers will use current and specific data to identify student academic levels. This data will be used to adjust, modify and subsequently create instruction that affords each student the ability to have access, choice and success through 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  scaffolding, differentiation and multiply entry points. Teachers will also use a variety of ways to tap into students learning modalities (e.g. exit slips, graphic organizers, skills based and ability based groupings). What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? To study students data in order to impact their outcomes. We will administer i-Ready three times a year to assess our students skills, strengths and abilities in both ELA and Math. Through the analysis of historical data, i-READY data and pre and post unit assessments to determine our push-ables and slipp-ables so we can provide targeted instruction through AIS/RTI push in and pull out services as well as during Saturday Academy. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) I-Ready Diagnostic Fontas and Pinnel Summative Pre Unit Assessments Diagnostic All Grades All Grades All Grades Post Unit Assessments Summative All grades On Demand Writing Diagnostic, Formative and All grades Summative Student Data Student Data Student data in Math, Science and Social Studies Student data in Math, Science and Social Studies 1. Prepare students for realistic writing experiences. 2. Student data in ELA and Social Studies Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, there will be a 5% increase in the average level of students’ proficiency rates across all sub-groups, on the NYS ELA and Math exams as a result of administrators and teachers collaborating and analyzing summative and formative assessments to enhance and strategically implement instructional practices and curricula to improve learning outcomes for all students. This will be measured by the results of the 2019 -Spring NYS English Language Arts Math assessment as well as ongoing I-Ready assessments. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase in Students' Attendance Increase Student Average ELA Proficiency Increase Student Average Math Proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers ELA Average Proficiency 2018-2019 school year Community based organizations : How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase Teacher Effectiveness and Increase in student productivity and achievement Math average Proficiency Generation Ready - ELA Consulting NTN- Math Consulting Teachers College - ELA Curriculum and Professional Development Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Teachers will participate in cycles of professional development to support the implementation of a comprehensive literacy program. This will include: PD on how to incorporate small group reading strategies that will help guide students toward becoming independent readers who build knowledge and understanding through texts.. PD at the TC Writing Institute that will prepare teachers to teach units of study in writing. PD to support science (facilitated by Urban Advantage) and math (facilitated by NTN-Consulting) teachers on how to implement inquiry based learning activities to promote 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  higher order thinking by discovery of students. Use i-Ready three times a year as a universal screening tool to provide benchmark data to identify and provide a mechanism to monitor progress of student for reading and math comprehension All students including ELL’s and SWD. ELA Average Proficiency Math Average Proficiency September 2018, January 2019, and June 2019 Assistant Principal will create program for facilitation of assessments and Communicate the specific aspects of the reading progress data to the school community. Teachers and Paraprofessionals will conduct secondary diagnostic screenings. Increase Teacher Effectiveness and Increase in student productivity and achievement Teachers will be observed 4 to 6 times over the course of the year. Data Talk will also take place 3x's over the course of the year. Admin Team and the Instructional Cabinet will also work to partnership to calibrate to ensure teaching and learning remains effective and efficient Increase Teacher Effectiveness and Increase in student productivity ELA Average Proficiency All students including SWD and ELLs 2018-2019 School year All teachers guided by the Department Chair All teachers across the grades and content areas will teach reading comprehension strategies and will embedded them in their respective content areas 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  in supporting all readers in becoming better readers, critical thinkers and independent readers with stamina. We will implement the Data Wise Protocol for data inquiry and targeted ELA and Math teacher development in order to monitor, track student growth and teacher improvement. All students ELA, Math, 2018-2019 Instructional Specialist Assistant Principal and achievement Classroom Observations and Benchmark Data. 1. Increase student performance and achievement . 2. Improve Math and ELA teacher practice. 3. Support teachers with better understanding, processing, and using student data and work products. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Monthly parent meetings will be held during which time Department chairs will provide parents with an overview of mission, vision, resources and systems in place to ensure student success. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Resources to support curriculum instruction and learning ● Composition Notebooks for Readers/Writers Workshop ● Lab notebooks for science inquiry activities ● Mentoring Minds ● Visual Arts curriculum texts 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  ● Spanish curriculum texts ● Key Elements to Mathematics (KEM) Curriculum texts ● Inspire Science and Lab-Aids Science curriculum texts ● Reading Essential texts to support science ● Science “Notebook” texts to support Students with Disabilities Resources to support academic intervention: ● i-Ready online academic intervention tool for both ELA and Math ● Access Code online phonics intervention ● Books on tape [accommodation for ELLs] Resources to support teacher professional development ● Interactive Whiteboard Professional development ● Generation Ready Literacy Consultant and Coach ● NTN Math Numeracy Consultant and Coach ● Hamilton Wireless Headphones to support in class communication and support ● Professional service Lit Life Literacy/ Instructional Consultant ● Teacher College Reading Writing Institute PD Schedule adjustments to support planning, instruction, and learning ● Common planning periods will be embedded into the school day schedule. ● Teacher Team/Inquiry Periods will be scheduled to promote data analysis. ● 80 minute professional development annual calendar ● Cabinet meeting times will be scheduled weekly to evaluate calendar of collaborative practices, discuss observation schedules, evaluate MOTP data, and to develop cycles of targeted instructional supervision. ● Master schedule for CBO activities during the school day. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26  ● CBO, Counseling in Schools partnership will provide social emotional support during the instructional blocks to allow for more instructional time on task. Per session/Per Diem resources to support instruction and learning: ● Expanded Learning Time programming 5hr/week ● Special Education and ENL compliance program 30 hours. ● Regents Prep Program 40 hours ● NYS Exam Test Prep - Winter Recess, Spring Break, Saturdays - 40hours each Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019: The i-Read assessment data will show that 50% or more students made progress in reading comprehension as indicated by the growth from the September i-Ready assessment to the January i-Ready assessment which indicates development in reading comprehension. -benchmark unit exam data will reveal that 50% of students made progress toward becoming proficient in power standards. We will see a growth rate of about 2% to 5% for both ELA and Math Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. i-Ready Diagnostic will be done 3 times during the 2018-2019 school year. Once in the fall, winter and Spring in each grade. There will be ongoing assessing and tracking of student work to ensure students are receiving targeted and specific support. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. . . X . Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection: Based on PBIS data from the previous schools year there was an increase in students who made the incentive points and a decrease in student occurrences. This new school year we will be implementing PBIS from September to June. We are developing and revising our Positive Behavior Support System that is marked by incentives based activities for students and is aligned to our schools goals and visions for creating a positive and safe culture and tone. We also use section sheets to monitor the pulse of the classes as they move from room to room. Strengths: As shown by our HEDI ratings on the Learning Environment Survey, students indicate that they feel safe in the school and they are able to share thoughts and concerns with teachers, social worker, and school safety agents. In addition, we have a system in place whereby students can place notes in the school leader’s and student government suggestion box to share their voice about peer matters or provide suggestion to improve our school community. The school has developed systems [RTI model and PBIS framework] to support the academic, social and emotional developmental health of students. The Special Education Team works with instructional staff and external partners to provide students and their families with information about interventions, academic progress, flexible programming, and learning needs. They also collaborate to follow up on referrals and implement required services for students. The attendance team monitors student attendance and follows up with families to address medical, social, or emotional needs. We initiated a program (Check and Connect) to align identified teachers with at risk students in a submit weekly reports that provide an interaction check of mentors with mentees and to inform decision-making in relation to students’ social and emotional health needs. We will also be continuing our impleenting of RULER. RULER teaches the 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  skills of emotional intelligence — those associated with recognizing, understanding, labeling, expressing, and regulating emotion. Need Improvement: While our attendance rate is only slightly below the citywide average, there is a need to ensure that students are attending classes and not missing critical instructional support due to low student attendance. It is our strong belief that we give every student every opportunity to succeed if they are in school, therefore our target goal is 89%. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? Community stakeholders will be able to describe our school as a place where students show respect, build rapport with other students and experience interactions with other students and teachers which are warm, based on genuine caring, express openness, and promote honesty. Parents will describe the school as a place where they feel comfortable and confident to visit and are proud to send their children. Teachers would describe the school as a strong collaborative community that is built on the foundation of trust. We integrate each of the CBO partnerships into our general school curriculum. This model provides a more meaningful way for CBO’s to support instruction and learning. Our partnership with Urban Advantage provides science teachers with professional development in the area of inquiry based learning. Students participate in a weekly hands-on lab activity that is aligned to the current curriculum content. Embedded into our Advisory Program is RULER for grades 6, 7 and 8. Sports and Arts Foundation for Schools provides a plethora of social clubs and actives for students. Student voice and leadership is developed and supported through the student government. Student Government cabinet will meet monthly with the principal as they represent their peer concerns and or ideas. Next year’s student government will create a school store which will serve as a vehicle for supporting our PBIS. We will continue with PBIS however, we have discussed modifying our current program to reflect a more simplified approach to using incentive points. As a renewal school we will continue to partner with Counseling in the Schools. They will support our school community by providing a coordinator to monitor and manage community resources for the school and students (i.e., referrals to mental health providers, supporting the STARR -Stop, Think, Address, Reflect, Re-enter alternative to suspension center with proactive strategies to address disciplinary concerns, etc.). We will measure social emotional development by the following means : ● Decreasing the number of level 4 and 5 occurrences in OORS. ● Monitoring of our students’ behavior to discern their increased abilities to regulate their emotions, handle stress and express themselves in an appropriate physical and emotional manner. ● Increase the number of positive responses regarding bullying and safety by students on our learning environment survey. The extended cabinet (administration, family worker, guidance counselor, and CBO) will meet to analyze data, identify patterns, and address with immediate next steps. Bi-weekly we will set goals aligned to the data and assign individuals who will be responsible for ensuring they are met. Subsequent meetings will be used to determine if goals were met and continue our progress towards completion. Counseling in Schools will provide restorative justice circles, direct counseling, whether individual, or group to at risk students as well as youth development through creative arts and 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29  family support. Attendance and absenteeism will improve as students and their families will feel that they are being supported, have someone that they can talk to, and believe that they are receiving the attention that they need. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus Counseling In Schools Mental Health counselors will coordinate trainings, staff consultations, provide individual and family counseling, crisis interventions and referral services. Urban Advantage Is as standards based approach designed to increase students understanding of scientific inquiry through collaborations between public and science cultural institutions. New York Edge Program The New York Edge Program's goal is to help bridge the academic performance gap among underachieving students by extending the school day and year with wholesome, skill-building activities designed to improve New York City children’s academic performance, health and wellness, attitude towards school, self-confidence, character and values, and opportunity for lifelong employment. How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? By working in partnership students will receive great support, guidance, and structure. Counseling in Schools will provide on the spot crisis intervention and long term counseling sessions for students and their families as needed. Urban Advantage it provides an opportunity for students and their family's to visit science cultural institutions. The Sports & Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF)’s goal is to help bridge the academic performance gap among underachieving students Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 the school community, in collaboration with our main CBO, Counseling in Schools will increase student attendance to 90% as measured by daily ATS data. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase Attendance Increase Student Average ELA Proficiency Increase Student Average Math Proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All All students including SWD and ELLs Monthly 2018-2019 Dean, Counseling in schools, Guidance Counselor/Social Worker. school year Our CBO and team will create a PD that is specific to meet the needs of the students that they service. How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in attendance and a Decrease in OORS reports Provide ongoing professional development and training to staff to address the social-emotional needs of the school community. ● RULER Training ● Training in restorative circles ● Training in collaborative problem solving ● Training in conflict resolution ● Training in Life Space Crisis Intervention. ● Training in Anecdotal documentation ● Training in how to integrate PRIM (Pre Referral Intervention Manual) strategies Work collaboratively with PBIS coordinators (guidance counselor, Social Worker, and mental health providers) to review PBIS data identify students with at All All students including SWD and ELLs Weekly 2018-2019 CBO, Counseling in Schools Social Workers, Guidance Counselor, Family Worker school year Increase in attendance and a Decrease in OORS reports 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  risk behavior to provide interventions and supports. Provide students with a school-wide advisory program to address the social-emotional needs of students at the start of the instructional day. Focus will address bully prevention awareness, conflict management, respect for all awareness, and college and career preparation. Teachers will meet with small groups of students which will allow for an opportunity for each student to be well known by at least one adult. ● Advisory program will also include implementation of “Check and Connect” program for our most severe at risk students to be partnered with one specific faculty member who will meet with the student at least once a week and with parent/guardian monthly. CBO will provide access to mental health services and provide mentorship program to support most at risk students. All All students including SWD and ELLs 2018-2019 All staff members school year Counseling in Schools Director will monitor as well as Teachers and guidance team. Increase in attendance and a Decrease in OORS reports At risk students All Counseling in Schools. Increase in attendance and a Decrease in OORS reports Weekly (As needed) 2018-2019 school year 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 32  Provide monthly parent workshop on various topics and activities aligned with school goals provided by CBO and Parent Coordinator. Family and Parent counselling offerings. The monthly parent workshop will consist of the following: Curriculum and Standards Night High School Selection Process Breast Cancer Walk Movie Night Paint Night Understanding My Adolescent Child Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to support academic intervention ●Response to Intervention Teams ● Bi weekly Extended Cabinet meetings to address incident and attendance data. Resources to support social emotional development and intervention: ●Alternative to suspension program STARR ●In class support by mental health providers. Resources to support staff professional development ● Restorative circle workshop ● Life Space Crisis Intervention workshop Schedule adjustments to support planning, instruction, and learning ●Advisory Periods 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 33  ●Lunch time recreation time via the use of the play yard and board games. ●Integration of after school program that addresses arts and fitness ●Master Schedule for CBO activity during general school day ●Annual Schedule of monthly Incentive Activities Per session/Per Diem resources to support instruction and learning: ● Expanded Learning Time programming 5hr/week Other support resources: ● Pupil Path/SKedula online grading and anecdotal tool Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 , our daily average student attendance rate will increase from 88 to 89.0%. Through Positive Behavior Interventions and Supports targeting our chronically absent and at-risk students’ progress. By February we will be at 90%. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure progress by an increase in students' attendance in ATS. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection Instructional rounds, data talk, and observation schedules are driven by Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School, District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, and NYC School Survey evidence showed that although teachers plan for instruction that is aligned to CCLS, the instruction is mildly driven by scaffolds and multiple entry points. Common planning time built into the program, the time is used consistently and efficiently. Teacher teams will meet as follows: Science - Wednesdays, period 1, Math - Mondays, period 4, ELA- Wednesdays, period 3, Social Studies - Mondays, period 7, Special Education Teachers - Mondays and Tuesdays, period 1. Strengths: Each year teachers prior to the beginning of the school year, teacher participated in either Saturday or summer planning devoted to the creation of curriculum maps and creating CCLS-aligned unit plans. Quarterly, lesson plan clinics are facilitated by consultants. The clinics are designed to help teachers develop rigorous and coherent CCLS-aligned instructional plans for all students. Teachers incorporate the use of accountability forms to document professional development, evidence of data analysis, and/or discussion focus. During meetings they analyze summative assessment data to identify student misconceptions and needs based student groupings. Needs Improvement: Based on Statement of Practice HEDI rating while there has been a focus on collection of data the structure and systems are not working to support our need to analyze the data consistently. We are working on providing more opportunities for distributive leadership and improving the systems that are in place. Also, to incorporate structures and times for Horizontal Grade team meetings and vertical department meetings. We are continuing our work with teacher teams through aligning “Looking at Student Work” protocols, especially focused on implementing and analyzing baseline assessments in writing before each unit/genre is taught to impact the instructional 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35  decisions made by teachers in the humanities content areas. Therefore, we want to improve our system of creating comprehensive unit plans by implementing the “backwards design” method of planning. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? Our school wide program reflects common planning periods that are aligned in the teachers schedule to provide grade/subject teachers time to collaboratively prepare and plan unit and lesson plans. There is one general education teacher that works in a collaborative team model with one special education teacher. They teach two classes (one including an ICT class) together and one class each (General Education teacher with on track class and Special Education teacher with Special Class 12:1 and or 12:1:1) independently. In our social studies classes, teachers will engage students in a block program that includes readers and writers workshop model, A literacy consultant works collaboratively with teachers to unpack Passport to Social Studies ' comprehensive unit that includes alignment to curriculum content, assessments and Social Studies historical background content. The writers workshop is guided by Teachers College Institute curriculum. Teachers will review their formative data frequently and their summative data (Fontas and Pinnel and iREADY Diagnostics) three times a year to identify is students are moving toward meeting benchmark goals for reading comprehension. In the Math class teachers will engage student in an exploratory workshop that is guided by "think moves'. This instructional practice promotes an inquiry based approach to learning where students explore and investigate a problem before receiving explicit teaching. Teachers will review Pre and Post Unit Exams, iREADY Diagnostics and formative assessment data regularly to identify if students are moving toward meeting benchmark standard based goals. Teachers provide opportunities to deepen learning for higher achieving students through the provision of Regents prep classes for both Living Environment and Integrated Algebra. Teachers will enforce the expectations of our PBIS to ensure that every child is safe in their class. Both horizontal and vertical Teacher teams will use the Datawise Protocol for data inquiry regularly to review and analyze student data. (i.e., pre and post unit, authentic writing, and MOSL). The analysis results will enable teachers to identify instructional enrichment or remediation that is needed. Opportunities are provided for distributive leadership (Lead Teachers and PIC's in ELA and Science as well as a model teacher in Mathematics. Structures were developed for the Tier 3 Team to conduct instructional rounds in an effort to address our school wide problem of practice, facilitate professional development to their peers, and work to identify next steps and practices that are needed to support instruction. Members meet bi weekly after school. Our CBO, Counseling in Schools will support the general curriculum by providing in class guidance support to address social emotional concerns which will allow for teacher to spend more time on instruction. We will continue with our CBO's who will provide academic enrichment opportunities during non-school hours for our students. The program will 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36 help our students meet state and local student standards in core academic subjects, such as reading and math; offers students a broad array of enrichment activities that can complement their regular academic programs; and offers literacy and other educational services to the families of participating students. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The school's instructional cabinet will have ongoing dialogue with each other and with the consultants who work with the teachers. This ongoing dialogue will work to ensure that teachers and administration is accountable. More importantly, through ongoing dialogue and support teacher's practice will improve. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers will work in collaboration and in partnership during their weekly grade team meetings and department team meetings analyzing student work and next steps to support and improve student progress and achievement. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers will work in collaboration and in partnership during their weekly grade team meetings and department team meetings analyzing student work and next steps to support and improve student progress and achievement. This collaboration will take place in the form of sharing best practices and resources, inter-visitations, and working in partnership to improve students outcomes. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent I-Ready Assess and Analyze Data to drive instruction Assess and Analyze Data to drive instruction Pre and Post Unit Assessments - Math, Science and Social Studies READY Assess and Analyze data to drive instruction Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will participate in weekly common planning periods resulting in a 20 point increase in student performance levels on the I-Ready diagnostic exams in both English Language Arts and Math. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37 List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase Student Attendance Increase Student ELA Proficiency Increase Student Math Profiency 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) We will use i-Ready diagnostic 2018-2019 Admin, Teachers, and consultants school year 2018-2019 Administration, Tier 3 Team Advance Ratings school year 2018-2019 school year Teachers I-Ready, Protocol Rubrics All All Students including ELL's, SWD's, and High Performers Teacher, CBO All All All Students including SWD's, ELL's, Higer Performers iReady Teacher Inquiry team will collaborate to complete a minimum of two inquiry cycles aligned to one of the Framework for Teaching components (1e, 3b, 3c, or 3d) to identify next steps and practices that are needed to support lesson planning and instruction. Teacher teams will use i-Ready assessment rubrics and "looking at student work" protocol to inform small group instruction and next steps for instruction adjustment. Data Wise All students and staff All 2018-2019 Admin team, teachers, and consultants school year .IReady assessments and results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  Action Plan/How???  Implementation of TC's Reading and Writing Curriculum  PD TC Writing Protocols  Group Norms  Data Analysis  Department Common Planning Time  Grade Level Team Meetings Inter-visitations   Partnering for PD  Instructional Supervisors  Peer Instructional  Coaches Instructional Cabinet Meetings  PD focusing on Small Group Differentiated Planning for (ENL, SWD, and High Performers) Implementation of Appropriate and Targeted Practices to ensure improvement and accelerated student achievement. Implementation of Programs as Wilson Reading, Rewards, Spire, and use of Fontas and Pinnel Assessments to ensure proper development of individual student goals.  4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. During the 2018-2019 school year the school will host numerous "Open Houses" during which time parents are invited to sit into their child's classroom. This practice will allow students, parents and teachers to participate in common experiences and common goals. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to support staff professional development *Inquiry Work: Use Data Wise Team to support and provided protocol for “Looking at Student Work” Schedule adjustments to support planning, instruction, and learning ● Program to reflect weekly Teacher Teams for Department and Grade Level ● Inter-visitation and Intra - visitation schedule ● Scheduled time for RtI team meetings. Per session/Per Diem resources to support instruction and learning: ● Expanded Learning Time programming 5hr/week ● Saturday Academy Other support resources: ●Laptops with updated Flash player and headphones with microphones are the necessary resources. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other 41  Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, all departments will complete a minimum of one cycle of research based on "looking at student work" using the Data Wise protocol to analyze individual student data and identify the specific targeted instruction to address all student needs.. We will employ the I-Ready diagnostic in both ELA and Math in January 2019 to progress monitor and re-evaluate action plan to ensure achievement of established goal. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Employment of I-Ready Diagnositic in both ELA and Math will take place in September, January, and March prior to State testing to ensure achievement of the annual goal. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). . . X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection: Based on the 2018 Quality Review findings, PPO, and the Learning Environment results, the school leader is progressively working toward creating a cohesive system for providing feedback to teachers that is actionable, yields an accurate snapshot of their progress towards Effective and Highly Effective instructional practices. However, there is a need to ensure that evidence based structures are used to examine and improve school wide practices. The principal must ensure that system includes providing feedback that also identifies how professional development opportunities impacts instruction and learning as teachers are transitioning to a new balanced literacy program and exploratory Math workshop model. Strengths:The school incorporated a weekly professional book club. We also incorporated an assessment tool (iREADY) that supports us in better understanding our students as they work and function in the classroom. We will use the data wise protocol to complete department data inquiry to improve teacher practice resulting in greater student success. Need Improvement:Based on the PPO feedback, there is a need to incorporate teacher teams and goal setting are all areas that are in needs of improvement. In addition, the school leader must effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP. Professional 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  development opportunities, including lesson plan/ designing coherent instruction clinics conducted by consultants should be provided to help teachers develop rigorous and coherent CCLS-aligned for all students. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? The Principal and administrative cabinet will continuously articulate the shared vision and mission to the entire school community by using various strategies: present school wide goals to staff, staff handbook, at vertical and horizontal team meetings. Principal will ensure the CBO partnership is strong by programming meeting times with Community School Director to discuss ongoing concerns. CBO partners will collaborate with school staff by participating in vertical and horizontal team meetings and conferencing with staff on an individual needs forum. Evidence based systems would include progress monitoring of both teacher and student progress and performance through horizontal and vertical data inquiry. This data will be shared by the Data Specialist via spreadsheet, teachers conferencing notes, and submission of common planning assessment analysis worksheet and accountability logs. The school leader will create a program and utilize budget resources to allow for teachers to participate in continuous professional development focused on literacy that is interdisciplinary and interdepartmental, long term and ongoing. Distributive leadership will be provided to all teacher leaders to facilitate specific professional development programs and turn-key information, strategies, and best practices for our teaching community. Teachers will be encouraged to identify external professional development opportunities. Teachers who attend these external professional development programs will be expected to share with our teacher teams successful instructional practices and the evidence of their success, through formal and informal structures. The school leader will create a comprehensive plan for all common planning time that is focused on addressing either teacher instructional development, analyzing assessments, and/or looking at student work. The school leader and cabinet will create a comprehensive schedule to conduct the mandated requirement teacher observations as aligned to the Advance system. Administrators will identify individual target areas of focus through data inquiryfrequent and productive observations. The school will support shared accountability through the distributive leadership of grade team leaders, department leaders, and other teacher representatives. Representatives from each area of the school, including CBO, will sit on the Extended Cabinet team meeting bi weekly to review data aligned to academic, social emotional, and attendance and discuss methods to improve. An AP, family worker, parent coordinator, social worker/guidance counselor, and DOE family outreach representative, will meet bi weekly to review attendance data and discuss methods to improve. Dean, Social worker/guidance counselor, and Community School Director will meet weekly to review OORS data and discuss methods to improve. Supervision of subject curriculum will be delegated to the assistant principal and coordination and management of CBOs and social emotional development program (STARR center) will be delegated to Community School Director. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? My leadership goals for this school year include small group instruction, enhancing student independence (reading, writing, thinking, and mathematics(problem solving), progress monitoring and celebrating my school community for both small and large achievements. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44 My vision for ensuring that everyone at Bronx Math Prep has a normed and shared vision is by being transparent and engagin in ongoing communication. with students, parents, and staff about the schools expectation, norms, values, and culture. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? My vision for developing differentiated leadership is capitalizing on Grade Team Leaders, Department Leaders, and Teacher Leaders, Inquiry Teams, and providing support respectively to teachers at Bronx Math Prep. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? The school leaders will foster collaborative school governance by Monthly Parent Meetings, Backpacking all correspondence, Robo calls, Phone banking, Student Government, PTA, and SLT. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Weekly Daily Written and Verbal Feedback What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) IEP Students OORS and ATS/ New Vision Reports Students All Stakeholders All Stakeholders How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? The schedule and program for both teachers and students will maximize students' class time by ensuring that students are receiving the best instruction daily by using research based curriculum and researching and analyzing students' work products. In addition teacher will be required participate in data inquiry using the Data Wise Protocol. Engage in professional development and use of NTN, TC, and Generation Ready Consultants to ensure that both teachers and students needs are met. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  By June 2019 there will be a 20% increase in the number of teachers rated effective according to the HEDI rating in components 1e and 3c as a result of administrators conducting frequent classroom observations with timely and effective feedback including clear actionable next steps. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase Attendance Increase ELA Proficiency Increase Math Proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Principal, Assistant Principal, Consultants (Data Wise, NTN, TC, Generation Ready,and Core Ready) Principal, APs, Consultants (Data Wise, NTN, TC, Generation Ready) Principal, AP’s, Consultants (Data Wise, NTN, TC, Generation Ready,and Core Ready) Professional Development Teachers and Paraprofessionals All Bi-Weekly 2018-2019 school year Weekly 2018-2019 school year 2018-2019 school year (Data Wise-Inquiry Group, Teachers' College, NTN, Generation Ready) Modeling and Coaching Teachers and Paraprofessionals All All Teachers and All students including SWD and ELLs On a quarterly basis, the principal and administrative cabinet will review student data to analyze and aggregate data by grade and subject that is aligned to student progress and provide feedback to department and individual teachers. ● Evaluation Feedback will be used to guide mid-year teacher and administrative conferences. ● Evaluation Feedback will be used to How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in use of student work to drive instruction, teaching, learning, planning, and preparation. Increase effectiveness and efficiency with teachers and all support personnel Increased and improved teacher evaluation ratings specifically in their planning, preparation, and instructional practice. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  identify professional development needs and adjustment to plan. Advance training and norming Instructional Rounds, Inter-visitations on and off site All Teachers All School Leader, Consultants (Consultants (Data Wise, NTN, TC, Generation Ready,and Core Ready) Monthly and as needed 2018-2019 school year Through Increased support teachers will demonstrate improve teaching practices resulting increase student learning and achievement. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Bronx Math Prep will support families by having them participate in the SLT, having frequent meetings with the principal (e.g. Breakfast with the Principal), and by working closely with the Parent Association board to ensure strategies are identified and supported to ensure students' success at home and in school. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to support staff professional development  Generation Ready Literacy consultant and Coach  NTN- Numeracy Consultant and Coach  Professional Learning PD Calendar  TC Writing Institute Professional Development Schedule adjustments to support planning, instruction, and learning  Daily/Weekly Common Planning  Programming that reflects similar schedule for teachers per department 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  Per session/Per Diem resources to support instruction and learning: ● Summer Intensive Institute ● 2 Weekend Retreats (Fall and Spring) ● Lunch and Learns Other support resources: ●Access to i-Ready assessment and online data retrieval system Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an increase of a point in our school-wide average in Danielson Components 3c, as a result of our comprehensive PD plan, administrators conducting frequent classroom observations with timely and effective feedback including clear actionable next steps. We will have a mid-point check in February.  Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance - Danielson Framework Rubric Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Reflection: Based on the 2018 Quality Review, Learning Environment Survey, and Integrated Intervention Team Review findings the school has many systems in place to cultivate a trusting relationship with families and to provide ongoing communication. Strengths:There is an “open door policy” for all community members and builds respectful relationships by sponsoring frequent activities like a full day annual orientation for both parents and students that focuses on “Get to Know our School Community” on the first day of school. We implement a five point communication system for parent/home outreach: back pack information with students, mail information, information shared on school based web page, use of School Messenger system and REMIND text for mass messages. We use NYCDOE based program Wake Up! NY attendance messenger for students that have shown consistent lateness. Monthly Parent Association meetings facilitated by one of our nine CBO’s (The Leadership Program). CBO and focuses on providing information about student academic/achievement, opportunities to engage parents and students in interactive activities, and professional development for parents. Needs Improvement: While the school has structures and systems in place to provide ongoing communication to parents there is a need to improve our system to address communicating detailed student performance data to families, many of whom lack computer access and/or literacy or are not proficient English. In addition, we are working to build our parents capacity to engage in reciprocal ongoing communication with the school about their children’s’ strengths and areas of challenge. As a community school there are plans for the Social Worker and CBO to collaboratively support 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50  the High School Articulation process for both grades 7 and grade 8. Also, for the Social Worker and CBO to create a system to track student progress as they move on to high school . Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? Student government and class ambassadors will be nominated to welcome families and guests into the school. Students will meet parents and greet them, give them information about the various programs, and tour of the school during various open house or parent engagement programs. School Safety will sign them in and call for an ambassador to meet them. This process will help to create a welcoming environment at our school. To provide support to families so that they understand and can take an active role in what their child is learning a monthly newsletter with the Principal's message, upcoming events at the school and the DOE will be listed, and community resources will be shared. Parents will also have access to our school’s online grading program, Skedula/Pupilpath so that they can obtain real time information about their child’s academic progress, conduct, and attendance. During our first meeting with parents we will review the student data, grading and state exams. In addition, we will provide training on how to navigate our schools online support tools (i.e., Pupil Path online grading system, etc.) to access and understand student data and progress. Our school will engage the community and families by setting up a specific meeting times outside of the quarterly parent/teacher conferences so that there is reciprocal communication between teachers and families to ensure both are able to learn about the children being taught. In addition, during our September meet and greet we will provide parents with a survey to gather any information that we might need to get to know the student better. And with the support of our community based organizations we will showcase quarterly parent meetings with student performance or celebrations ( Attendance/ academic/ arts program) There will be a dedicated space whereby parents can meet with other parents as well as with staff members. Our community partner will monitor the area to ensure parents feel welcomed and are provided with the resources or information about resources as needed. Through our “Parent As Learning Partners” program we will offer adult education for ESL, Computer and Technology Awareness, and Resume writing. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? Parents will have the opportunity to participate in various school committees such as, Community School Team, SLT (Student Leadership Team), and Community Engagement Team (CET) where they will have the opportunity to provide ideas and their vision to ensure that the students are successful. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? Parents will be identify to take leadership roles through surveys, one to one parent meetings, phone outreach and individualize invitations. Active participation, ongoing involvement, and maintaining healthy, positive, and meaningful 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51 relationship will ensure parents feel safe to engage and have a voice in the overall functioning and governance of the school. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? We have one to one meeting that will conducted by the students "Student Lead Conferences." These conversations allows for their to be a very active and engaging conversation. When the students take the lead, it eliminates the teacher and parent dialoguing about the student in front of them. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale School Leadership Team Parent Association Community School Team To have an active voice and role in their child's education by contributing to the major decisions that impact the overall school community. To have an active voice and role in their child's education by ensuring all parents needs, concerns, and questions are addressed. Hence, students will be able to perform better when students are equipped, empowered, engaged, and encouraged. To have an active voice and role in supporting all the stakeholders at Bronx Math Prep. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Meetings, School Team Meetings, Attendance Meetings Family partnerships with CBO: The Counseling In School Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Community and Educational resources accessible for parents during week days and weekends. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? TC Writing Assessments--Summative Ready -- Summative I-Ready-- Formative 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  Summative and Formative Assessments Attendance and Honor Showcase stations/displays Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. Annual Goal #5 Strong Family-Community Ties By June 2019 there will be a 5% increase of parents and guardians responding positively on the Strong Family and Community Ties Section of the NYC School Survey as a result of collaborating with Counseling In Schools, Parent Advocate, and our Parent Coordinator regulary and providing Student Data and ongoing parent and family workshops as measured by numbers of parents in attendance at each school event (i.e. Sign-In-Sheets). Action Plan Student-Led Parent-Teacher Conferences   Report Cards  Progress Reports  Monthly Newsletters  Parent Workshops  High School Articulation  Workshop Calendar for 2018-2019  Datacation  Ongoing Family Engagement Time o Family Friday’s o Family Game Night o Open School Night and Afternoon Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase student Attendance 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53 Increase ELA Proficiency Increase Math Proficiency 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Create and maintain school web page to provide limitless access to school’s information in particular how to participate in PA, SLT, or support other activities in the school. Use of online grading and reporting system, Skedula will ensure unlimited real time access to student progress. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Families School Community Students Attendance and Improve Students overall performance (e.g. Attendance, ELA, and Math) 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator school year Counseling in Schools PA President Teachers, Administration, CBO Parents, Students Improve Students overall performance (e.g. Attendance, ELA, and Math) 2018-2019 Teachers, Computer Technology Director school year Family Friday and Friday Game Night Parents Improve Students overall performance (e.g. Attendance, ELA, and Math) 2018-2019 Parent Coordinator school year Family Worker Parents Local community agencies providing various resources to parents (e.g. library, NY State ID, Leak and Watts, Mental Health Educational Services) Improve Students overall performance (e.g. Attendance, ELA, and Math) 2018-2019 School Leader, school year Parent Coordinator Counseling in Schools PA President Teachers, Administration, CBO How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Increase in parents participation and awareness of school-wide activities. Increased communication between teachers and parents discussing the performance of the students. Increased communication and participation in school wide events. Increased partnership with outside agencies and community stakeholders. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources to support parent engagement ● Review of attendance logs from monthly parent meetings. ● Attendance Logs of parents attending various school wide events ● Parent surveys to address concerns in communication and workshop needs. ● Invite parents to participate in Parent Association. ● Counselor facilitated articulation workshops for parents. ● Schedule adjustments to support planning, instruction, and learning ● Translator personnel to support students during state examination Other support resources: ● Support participation of non-English speaking parents at workshops, meetings, etc. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, school leaders, Parent Coordinator, and the CBO Director will present the multiple means by which the school has worked to increase parent involvement for the 2018-2019 school year (Examples: School Messenger, Skedula, interest surveys, parent workshops, CBO services, school events, Family Nights, informational, etc) and will provide documentation of parent outreach and parent participation for the September 2018-February 2019 time period. Parent participation will increase by 2 to 5%. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress will be both summative and formative assessments (e.g. Ready, i-Ready, pre and post tests, and culminating activities). Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019 we will increase availability and access to extended learning opportunities for 100% of our students that are in need of after school programs, accelerated Regents classes in Algebra and Living Environment, mentoring, tutoring, and other interest based programs measured by student attendance logs and student end of program surveys. Additionally, we look to improve attendance and academic enrichment through the offerings of these programs. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. We will actively encourage students' participation by providing them with a plethora of activities, clubs, and organizations that will stimulate and engage all learners at all levels. The CBO will be directly responsibly for hiring of staff to facilitate student clubs. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58   What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? All students will be offered a menu of activities from which to choose and ELT activity. E L T Program Name E L T Program Description Days Teacher Room or CBO Bronx D.A. Mock Trial Homework Help Video Game Design Math Enrichment/Remediation Literacy Enrichment/Remediation Cooking Boxing Planet Protectors Preparation for the Thurgood Marshall Junior Mock Trial competition held at the Bronx County court building. Teach students about judicial system and collaborate with lawyers to prepare students for mock trials. Small group support with homework in all subjects. Game Builders Academy Technology is designed to get you excited about math, science, and technology. Small group targeted support to help students improve in math. Small group targeted support to help students improve in reading and writing. .Students will learn the basis skills of cooking. Students will be learning the basic skills of boxing in a safe environment. Protector, your mission is to improve the world around you by making less trash. Planet Protectors also help T- F 41 Teacher T-F CBO 45 T-F CBO 420 T-F Teacher 47 T-F Teacher 43 T-F CBO 438 T-F CBo 436 T-F CBO 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  Building Beats Photography STEM Engineering Chorus other people learn to reduce, reuse, and recycle. Students will learn how to produce beats via keyboard and ther instruments Learn how to use a camera and video for storyboarding, elements of a story, videography, video editing, and publishing techniques. Students will apply science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in contexts that make connections between school, community, work, and the global enterprise Use critical thinking with logic and problem solving and learn how to present your products. Sing in unison with your peers and prepare for school community performances. T-F CBO T-F CBO 432 T-F CBO 414 T-F CBO 48 Tues/Wed CBO 42 E L T Program Name Cosmology E L T Program Description Students will learn the skill of doing hair. Tues/Fri Days Teacher Room Tues/Fri Ms. Farah 418A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60 47 436 41 SASF Keys to an Abundant Life SASF Cooking Students will learn the basic skills of cooking. Tues/Fri Tues/Fri Learn how to use a camera and video for storyboarding, elements of a story, videography, video editing, and publishing techniques. Activities that allow for creative and imaginative expression. Photography Creative Arts  Drumming Boxing Visual Arts Building Beats S.T.E.M Barbering Stress Relief Learn different types of drumming and prepare for school community performances. Students will be learning the basic skills of boxing in a safe environment. Students will create portfolios, which include skittle art and portraits Students will learn how to produce beats via keyboard and other instruments Students will apply science, technology, engineering, and mathematics in contexts that make connections between school, community, work, and the global enterprise Teaching students the skills of cutting hair. Develop important skills and have fun learning what it takes to run your own business. Tues/Fri Mr. Wilson 424 Tues/Fri Mr. Sutherland Gym Tues/Fri SASF 44 Tues/Fri SASF 47 Tues/Fri SASF 45 Tues/Fri Mr. Henry 414B Tues/Fri Ms. Ramos 46 We provide various project based programs in which students can gain skill development through hands-on experiences that will make learning relevant and engaging. CBO staff and our school’s teachers will work together collaboratively throughout the day. This relationship will help to build the foundation for the students’ familiarity of 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  all members of our school community and will help us to integrate the ELT in a seamless learning day. We will offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement because we will align the activities to their high interest. Therefore, if the students are interested in the programs they are more likely to participate and this will promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation. In addition, our Arts program will be integrated in the after school program to additionally provide for a seamless day. We will ensure effective outreach will take place through robo-calls, parent newsletters, school email blasts, and monthly parent meetings. Our Community Based Organization director will provide ongoing professional development opportunities for staff and facilitators. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. Our Counseling in the Schools Director will collaboratively oversee the ELT program with the assistance a plethra of community based organizations. Attendance data as well as i-READY progress reports will be used to assess the impact on student achievement. We will also administer quarterly student evaluation survey data obtained. We will look at student's attendance, i-ready results, progress reports, and report cards. Individual student data will be collected as students are post tested through i-READY for growth. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Extended Learning Time will start on September 7, 2018 and end on June 26, 2019. Major assessments will be as follows: September - Baseline, January - Mid Year Assessments and June- End Of year Assessment. Assessment tool is attendance rates and iREADY for student math and ELA score impact. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Program Suite “Renewal Hour” Human resources, instructional, resources. Study Hall/ Tutoring “Renewal Hour” I-Ready “Renewal Hour” STEM Teacher Math Teacher Science Teacher 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  X After School ELA/Math Test Preparation X Summer School ELA/Math Teacher ELA (3)/ Math (3) Teaches X Enrichment /Socio-Emotional Program Mentoring X After School Enrichment Program Digital Technology Coding X After School Counseling in the Schools Computer Spec. Social-Emotional Program Mentoring Coaches and Trainers Power Brain X After School Club Other Oracle/Debate Club Humanities Teacher Mock Trial Preparation X After School Club Other Boxing and Strength Training X Other Boxing Coach Literacy Consultant Consultant/Coach Numeracy Consultant Supplies and resources will be needed to support the continuation programming in both after school and during the summer. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X X Tax Levy X Title III X Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks By February 2019, we will review student attendance logs and student end of program surveys to evaluate if our students are participating in the opportunities for after school programs, academic enrichment, mentoring, tutoring, and other interest based programs . We will also progress monitor in accordance to our i-READY assessment schedule. We will also analyze total number of students who participated and the percentage student growth as compared to the previous year when all students were not in attendance for Extended Learning Time. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Increase in Student Participation and Engagement in Activities Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 we will continue to develop a community school program, through our ongoing partnership with Counseling in the Schools, that will incorporate three interconnected support systems-strong core instructional program, enrichment activities, and a full range of wellness and mental health services that will result in our school becoming more responsive to our students medical, social, emotional, recreational, and academic needs as measured by Online Occurrence Reporting System and attendance data. Measurable outcome would include higher student attendance as a direct result of being immersed in programs that supported their wellness and mental health welfare. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Increase Attendance Increase ELA Proficiency Increase Math Proficiency Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Counseling in Schools Students Abundant Life STH. New York Edge program All students Urban Advantage All students Academic Enrichment and Social Emotional Academic Enrichment and Social Emotional. Academic Enrichment and Social Emotional Support Science Academic Enrichment and Social Exposure to NYC Cultural Institutions Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  2. 3. 4. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. We will continue to partner with Counseling in the Schools and collaborate to identify our schools needs through a co-interpretation process. In addition, we worked together to complete our schools mental health survey. CBO will work in partnership with school staff to increase attendance, provide monthly parent engagement activities, both individual and family session and monthly workshops that are pertinent to families. CBO will also bring community resources to the families at the school. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students A Community School Director will work closely with administration to oversee the program. Her role will be to • Create school wide program that supports the coordination of all CBO activity. • Coordination and Communication of Activity Calendar • Work in collaboration with the PBIS Team to coordinate PBIS activities and trips. • Support school community with family outreach o Maintain appropriate documentation as aligned to the role of a Community Based Organization director. • Build partnerships with community political partners and other organization to support school initiatives. o Identify and provide “Check and Connect” to one family. • Participate as Community Liaison in the building council. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66  -- Attendance team will use data sorter to identify students at risk because of attendance and implement incentives and tracking protocols to improve student attendance. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. Community School Director Faculty for After-school program Instructional Specialist and Coach Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. September 2018 - June 2019 Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) State exam data, DRP data, report card information, teacher referral, department referral State exam data, DRP data, report card information, teacher referral, department referral State exam data, DRP data, report card information, teacher referral, department referral Social Studies N/A At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Child Study Team/RtI referral, Dean Referral, parent request, AP referral, Principal referral 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Conferring, Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group, and/or one to one. During the school day, and after school Small group guided instruction, afterschool tutoring.i-READY online intervention(Type of Program column Saturday School iReady online intervention. Small group, and /or one on one During the school day, and after school Integrated Algebra Saturday School Living Environment Regents Small group Saturday School N/A At-risk counseling, Response to Intervention, Positive Behavior Incentive Support Program, Attendance team, functional behavioral counseling, academic counseling, Community Outreach (AIDP), MDR, 504 N/A N/A Small group, one to one As needed 68  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 50 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies, Community linkages to various resources, Home visits, continuous and ongoing outreach. Additionally, access to technology, books, resources, study hours after-school. Abundant Life Program targets students who are in temporary and traditional housing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Interviewed Questions to that reflect an understanding of teacher best practices (CCLS, meeting the needs of all students, belief in how students learn best, assessment practices, etc.) ● Mentoring to support new teachers, ● New Teacher Workshops Plan ● Buddy teachers, Co-teachers, ● Inter-visitations (Open door policy) ● Professional development, teacher teams, department meetings ● Tenure preparation sessions ● External PD opportunities ● Accelerated courses and programs ● Support in teacher to administration certification * Lunch and Learns for New TEachers 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Principal led professional development for school community 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  ● Central led Professional Development ● Instructional Rounds hosted by school and network ● Partners for CCLS coaching, support, and training ● Network PD for Lesson Plan Clinics; Lesson and unit planning that encourages CCLS best practices and strategies, monitoring the progress, and review of student work to revise the process as needed ● Intra visitations to peer school to observe best practices and strategies ● Specific school and/or instructional Goals and/or Objectives related to CCLS and skills ● Ongoing monitoring and support to provide teacher and paraprofessionals feedback on their practice ● Continuous review of student work related to CCLS to modify practice and meet needs of all students Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Grade/Curriculum teacher teams create common pre and post unit assessments ● Professional Learning PD committee identified needs and foci of school. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  ● MOSL committee collaboratively selected MOSL’s. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 322,583.00 0 11,200.00 0 1,869,688.00 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 08X375, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronx Mathematics Preparatory School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76    schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 08X375, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Rationale: The ELLs will be provided supplementary instruction to support their learning and help them to successfully meet the criteria set forth in the new Common Core Learning Standards. This instruction will take place during afterschool on Wednesdays and Thursdays. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: Expanding 16 students Transitioning 9 students Emerging 4 students Entering 6 students Students will be grouped according to their language needs as assessed by the NYSLAT. The groups are arranged by levels of allocation rather than by grade to better serve the students. The student will be group by their specific classifications (e.g. EN and EM and TR and EX grouped respectively). The students participating in these groups are in sixth, seventh and eighth grade. There will be approximatley 40 students participating in the program. The groups have been established and configured to meet the language needs of each group and to best serve the population. Language of Instruction: All students will be taught in English by the ESL teacher. # and types of certified teachers: The two certified ESL teachers will be providing instruction to the students. A supervisor will be provided to over see the program. An administrator will be paid to oversee the Title III program using Title III funds, since this is the only program running in the building at the time. Types of materials: The students will be attending a Saturday Academy for four hours. The program will begin November 3, and continue through February break for three days (19, 20, 21) during Winter Break. And it will continue on Saturdays beginning on March 2, 2019 and run until May 4, 2019, It will take place from 9am - 1pm. The intermediate and advanced ELLs will be taught through a book club, MyOn, and Finish Line--New York ELLs Biligual Common core. This will allow for discussion and enrichment. The focus will be on language and vocabulary acquisition through discussion and writing activities.The beginners will be instructed using the Practice Exercise in Basic English Series as well as MyOn and Just words. This program will be used to enhance vocabulary, fluency and comprehension in English. Some of the beginners will use Practice Exercises in Basic English Series and Just Words.. This program will benefit the students that need help with phonics, decoding and the alphabet for those students whose first language may have a different alphabet than English. All materials will be provided at no cost to Title III 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information except for Finish Line--New York ELL Bilinigual Common Core. Additionally, we will use the Toolkit from I-Ready and the I-Ready program to support our ELL learners. Attendance will be mainted by the two ENL teachers and the ENL supervior. All Title III LEP funds will be used for direct instruction. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: In order to support the content area teachers in their efforts to effectively teach the ELLs, a series of workshops will be conducted once a month during subject meeting to go over strategies and scaffolds that can be used to support the ELL learners in their content area learning. Teachers to receive training: These workshops will include ongoing regularly scheduled professional development to help the classroom teachers understand the language acquisition process and to give them key strategies they can use and add to their lessons. The focus will be to introduce and educate the teachers on the three types of Ells and the implications that has on instruction. This will take place over the course of five 50 minute sessions beginning in September, 2017. The teachers will also be trained on how language acquisition is obtained. They will learn techniques to better support the growth of academic language in the students they service in October, 2017. It will also help them to understand ways to get ELLs engaged in content area learning, and to give them strategies to help build the academic English Vocabulary of the ELL students they service. This will take place during two 45 -minute content area meetings in the last week of school in February. They will also receive professional development on tips on how to work effectively with Ells in the content areas. This will take two 50- minute session in the Spring of 2018. Rationale: Training will also be provided by Creative Solutions--part of school grant. focusing on supporting ELLs' language acquisition. The facilitator will be Jasmine McQuay. District 8 Field Support Professional Learning Series--Vanessa Baldini, and Kristy Dela Cruz New York State Regional Bilingual Education Resource Network-Eva Garcia Staff Records and Attendance of PD's will be maintained by the school secretary. Duration: Starting September of 2017 and continuing until June 2018 plus 2 PD days. Topics: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  Part C: Professional Development 1. The development of classrooms that are print rich. (A print-rich environment includes access to books and reference materials, labels and posters, and student work on bulletin boards) 2. The active use of Word walls organized by alphabet and phonetic sounds, new vocabulary words, sight words, grammar rules, conversational phrases, and writing structures. 3. Awareness of native language influences in relation to cognates and pronunciation and supporting students by providing a model of how to use sounds, structures, and vocabulary correctly in English. 4. Communicating effectively with students: Avoiding slang and idiomatic expressions and speaking clearly and naturally, without going too quickly or slowly. 5. Aiding student comprehension by scaffolding language (providing extra supports such as graphic organizers, visuals, etc.). Identify key concepts, vocabulary words, and references before the lesson, and give students as much time and practice with the new material as possible before starting the lesson. 6. Close and shared reading with a focus on fluency and academic language, previewing the text, teaching grammatical structures relevant to a particular content and showing how the targeted academic language is used in reading, writing, speaking, and listening. 7. Identifying patterns in words 8. Promoting Cooperative learning activities and peer interaction 9. Providing timely and constructive and effective feedback to student progress. 10. Supporting students to become meta- cognitively aware about the errors they ESL Teacher training: The ESL teachers, will attend the training with the district 8 Borough Field Support Office as well as also attending workshops offered by the Office of English Language Learners. At No Cost to Title III Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Recognizing the importance of parent engagement in the success of any student, especially those students struggling to acquire a new language, parent meetings and workshops will be set up. These workshops will be facilitated by the ESL teachers Ms. Lorenz and Mr. Akesode and the AP overseeing the ELL program(MS. Christie). Schedule and Duration: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Topic 1: Welcome and Celebration of Hispanic Heritage Month Rationale: Greet parents and welcome them to our school Date:September & October 2017 Time: 6-8 Name of Provider: x375 Principal, Assistant Principals, Parent Coordinator and teaching Staff Audience: All parents and specific ELL welcome and information session conducted by ESL Teachers. Topic 2: High school application process Rationale: To assist parents in choosing high schools and filling out the application Date: September 27, 2017 Time: 11:00 am-12:00pm Name of Provider: Ms. Critharis Audience: Parents of 8 th grade ELLs Topic 3: Basic English Language Instruction for parents Rationale: Parents have requested a class to learn English in order to help their children Date: Tuesdays starting December, 2017 until March, 2018 Time: 3:00- 3:45pm Name of Provider: ESL Teachers Audience: Parents of ELLs Topic 4: Literacy progress based on the i-Ready and running records Rationale:To share the progress of the students with the parents and to provide them with ways to help them at home. Date: January, 2018 Time: 2:40- 3:10pm Name of Provider: Ms. Brady, Data Specialist Audience: Parents of ELLs Topics to be covered: Parents will be educated on the programs in the school which have been set up to support the ELL learners. Of course the parents will be informed on the progress their child has made along with the goals for future learning. The parents will also be given information on how they can assist their children on the road to English proficiency. In addition to the parents will learn about the common core requirements as well as the new promotional requirements set forth by the DOE. These sessions will be 45- 50 minutes in length. Noitfication of parents: The parents will be notified via mail, flyers distributed in school to students and follow up phone calls. Topics to be covered: Parents will be educated on the programs in the school which have been set up to support the ELL learners. Of course the parents will be informed on the progress their child has made along 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities with the goals for future learning specifically on the interim assessments I-Ready. The parents will also be given information on how they can assist their children on the road to English proficiency. In addition to the parents will learn about the common core requirements as well as the new promotional requirements set forth by the DOE. These sessions will be 45- 50 minutes in length. Notification of parents: The parents will be notified via mail, fliers distributed in school to students and follow up phone calls. Parent engagement activities records will be maintained including notification in parents preferred home languages by the Parent Coordinator Cesar Rosa. Parent workshops will be funded at cost to Title III. Funds will be used to purchase PD materials, refreshments and or workshop presenters. The necessary staff will be compensated with per session if applicable. At no cost to Title III Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 86 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ 0 Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name The Bronx Mathematics Preparatory School Borough Bronx School Number 375 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Dyon T. Rozier Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ademola Akesode Teacher/Subject Area Jonathan Derr/ Mathematics Teacher/Subject Area Teresa Lewis/ELA Related-Service Provider Susan Ramlel Superintendent Karen Ames Assistant Principal Paulette Christie Coach School Counselor Roger Crawford Parent Melinda Leech Parent Coordinator Cesar Rosa Field Support Center Staff Member Kristy De La Cr Other (Name and Title) Desra Govia C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 88  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 250 Total number of ELLs 34 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 13.60% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We are apart of the Chancellor's Initiative whereby we adminsiter the DRP(Degrees of Reading Power) three times a year ( September/January/June) and we also use the I-Ready Diagnostic. We use the data to determine the next steps in creating specifc reading goals. WE review the DRP data and provide further assessment to determine the specific reading goals for each student. We establish small reading groups for 30 minutes of specific intervention group instruction. We use strategic reading skills for comprehension and the writing process. We use TOSWRF and WIST to further determine the specific needs of the student to determine which program to use with the students who fall below the indicator. The programs we have in place are Wilson, Just Words, My On Reading Program and a variety of TESOL strategies for new admits who are also classified as beginners or entering. The insights we have developed from the data indicates that many students need support with 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  phonemic awareness and sentence structure. Additionally, we will use Myon for reading exposure and building of reading skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Protected time for planning and pull-out student models. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Our team evaluates the success of our program for the ENL's by meeting twice a month with Assistant Principal, the ENL's teacher, one mathematics teacher, one social studies teacher and science teacher and our principal. Together we look at the results of the NYSESLAT, the NYSILTELL, i-Ready, DRP assessments and MOSL data. These results tell us where we need to focus to better serve our ELL students. For example it drives the instructional group development as well as the materials usd to teach the groups. Through this process we learned that we needed to work on building academic vocabulary in order for our students to be able to better attack questions. We also learned that our students needed to learn the terms for the parts of a onfiction document. Additionally, we will use Myon and Achieve 3000. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Use of Data Wise and Looking at Student Work Protocol to analyze student work and make necessary shifts and adjusts to curriculum and supports. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students are provided with 6 week intervention cycles. During that time assessments are given and students are provided with specific skill based instruction. They are monitored and assessed to determine next steps. Should a student need more support we begin the second level of intervention and provide one to one tutorials. Finally if there is no growth then we begin the final step which is a referral for specialized testing by the SBST. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns indicate that there is a correlation between the results of the NYSESLAT and the DRP scores as well as the indicator from the NYSITELL. Students in the 6 th grade show lower scores than in 7 th and 8 th grade due to their not having as much support prior to entering middle school. The data has indicated that if we support students with a more individualized program the growth on the DRP exams on the NYSESLAT indicates improvement. There has not been an increase of progress levels within the three years that students are in our school. This year we will be moving to flexible programming, whereby students will be grouped in order to address the specific needs of the students. The groupings will change as we review data and determine if there has been growth within the unit od study in humanities and ESl program. Additionally, we will use Myon and Achieve 3000. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Use of Data Wise and Looking at Student Work Protocol to analyze student work and make necessary shifts and adjusts to curriculum and supports. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. a. Instruction is delivered in combination with pull-out and push-in models. The students are serviced using these models combined in order to develop language and proficiency in the content areas as well as Basic English language skills. The students are taught techniques during push-in instruction that can be used even when the ESL teacher is not in the room. During pull-out instruction specific skills can be addressed. b. Most students not requiring 180 ELA minutes expanding or commanding may be placed in other classes. The ENL Students who also have a disability are placed according to their IEP requirements. This allows for targeted instruction in language development. The material purchased are also looked at to see if they contain ENL support such as ENL modification or native language materials such as Lab Aids, Moby Max, and TC Writiers Workshop and CMP3 math. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL teacher has scheduled and program students by the mandated minutes of service. Our students are receiving the appropriate number of minutes per NYS CR Part 154. • All entering and emerging students receive 360 minutes per week ( 180 minutes during the ELA blocks of instruction and 180 minutes in a pull out ENL session) while transitioning and Expanding students receive 180 minutes a week ( 90 minutes within the ELA block and 90 minutes in a pull out program). • These minutes are being provided in a Freestanding ENL program using both pull-out and push-in techniques by our full-time, certified ESL teacher 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Ell students are placed in the same class on each grade when possible. This helps with content area instruction. Content area instruction is scaffolded for the ELLS by using graphic organizers, first language materials where possible, modified tasks and a strong focus and pre-teaching on academic vocabulary. The ESL teacher also pushes in to math and ELA for added support. The ESl teacher also pre-teaches the concepts for the new units for ELA and math. The ELL students also have the modifications built into the new CC programs used such as Teacher's College Reading and Writing Project and CMP3 math. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? N/A 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Regardless of the ELL subgroup involved: • All students are flexibly grouped depending on their learning needs. • All groups practice test taking skills and understanding testing formats • Instruction is scaffolded using ENL strategies. • Students participate in a differentiated literacy program -Access Code and/or Just Words 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91  b) Newcomers receive native language support through the use of our native language library, native language versions of textbooks and Spanish English glossaries. They also have academic language development in the form of Word Generation which is provided in English and Spanish. They also use bilingual computer programs and translation tools. Newcomers also receive extra instruction in testing formats as well as translated tests in their native language when available since this may be new to them. c) Our ENLs with 4-6 years of service receive focused instruction on academic language acquisition through guided reading and writing groups which is provided in English and Spanish. d) Our long term ENLs also receive help with academic language acquisition through guided reading and writing groups, AIS groups and Word Generation. e.) Former ENLs receive testing modifications for two years. Former Ells are also serviced 2-3 times a week with the advanced ENL group. These students are also monitored through interim assessments, i-Ready, and Running Records three times a year. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Many of the same strategies are used for ENL-SWDs such as increasing visual aids, modeling, metacognition, bridging, graphic organizers and contexualizing learning. ENL-SWDs participate in strategic reading groups and Access Code, an online program that tracks student progress and provides them with understanding about how words work. Content instruction to ELL-SWDs is at grade level, however material is differentiated and scaffolded. In addition to working with our ELL teacher, ELL-SWDs are seen by a variety of service providers as per their IEP. Students are serviced in the least restrictive environment possible. Our Speech providers and Guidance Counselor carefully plan and adhere to their schedules so that all ELL-SWDs receive the amount of minutes per the student's IEP. These students are either pulled out of the classroom or the service provider will push in. In addition, we have a 12 to 1 class structured by our IEP Coordinator per the student's IEP. There are two mandated periods per week where our ENL/SWD receive instruction in ELA and Math in a small group setting. Ms. Akesode and Ms. Lorez our ENL teachers, our IEP Coordinator, Ms. Govia ensures that all students receive the services mandated. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students who are ELL-SWDs receive content instruction in the class designated for them by their IEP to be the least restrictive environment while still meeting their needs. Students are either in a 12-1, an ICT class or a class that allows for SETSS. The ICT model and the SETSS model have two teachers in the room for content area instruction. One teacher is a general Education teacher and one being a special education teacher. The ESL teacher either pushes-in the class or pulls students out for services by a certified ESL teacher based on their proficiency level per CR Part 154. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention program is done through careful consideration of programming, materials used, AIS implementation and teacher training. Programming is specific to ENL second language acquisition in order to ensure they are in the proper setting with the supports they need. Most ENL students are placed in the same class according to grade level. The ENL students who also have a disability are placed according to their IEP requirements. This allows for targeted instruction in language development. The materials purchased are also looked at to see if they contain ENL support such as ELL modification or native language materials such as TC and CMP3 math. The ENL students are also included in our AIS groups and grouped according to their language development needs to support their ELA needs. Students who need phonics or word help are placed in Just Words, Moby Max, Achieve 3000, and MyOn. Students who need comprehension development are placed in strategic reading groups. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In repsonse to the needs of our students, TBMPS has added i-Ready, MyOn, Moby Max, and Just Words to help with word acquisition. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. To make sure that all extra curricula and school activities are accessible to ENLs, notices and announcements of these programs were delivered in English and Spanish. The permission slips for each program and the interest surveys were also available in English and Spanish. ENLs are also grouped together during extended day for added support and after school and Saturday programs are available specifically for ENLs and taught by the ESL teacher. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We use a variety of instuctional material, such as: • For our Newcomer population in particular, we have ordered materials in Spanish for ELA, Science and Math. • Every student has access to a Spanish/English dictionary and a glossary. • Students have access to the computer program from MyOn, Moby Max, and I-ready and listening centers in their ELA classes. • All classrooms are equipped with ENO board technology to provide all students with more visuals during the presentation of new material and the opportunity to interact with the screen. We have enough laptops for every student to use to enhance their work. • Content teachers use graphic organizers to scaffold key concepts and aid in the writing process. • Our ENL teacher and content area teachers may uses the website Brainpop.com. Brainpo.com is also used for videos to introduce a unit or lesson. • Prior to NYSESLAT testing, students are given practice with test format via NYSESLAT test prep books. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? N/A 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? We use a variety of instuctional material, such as: • For our Newcomer population in particular, we have ordered materials in Spanish for ELA, Science and Math. • Every student has a bilingual dictionary and a glossary. • Students have access to the computer program from Access Code and listening centers in their ELA classes. • All classrooms are equipped with ENO board technology to provide all students with more visuals during the presentation of new material and the opportunity to interact with the screen. We have enough laptops for every student to use to enhance their work. • Content teachers use graphic organizers to scaffold key concepts and aid in the writing process. • Our ENL teacher and content area teachers may uses the website Brainpop.com. Brainpo.com is also used for videos to introduce a unit or lesson. • Prior to NYSESLAT testing, students are given practice with test format via NYSESLAT test prep books. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We offer a Parent Orientation to explain the language development support options available before the school year begins. We also provide a tour of the building to all new ELL students and their families with a school representative who speaks the home language of the families (if possible). On the first day of school we have a family orientation and lunch with 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93  the parents and teachers to answer any questions and to establish an open line of communication. ENLs who enroll throughout the school year are met with and interviewed by the ESL teacher and our ENL admittance team. They are given all the resources they need such as an agenda book, schedule, Word Generation book and notebooks for the four major subjects. The students are given a tour by the parent coordinator and a business card with her information. The student is also paired with another student with the same native language when possible. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Spanish to all students as an elective 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Content area teachers are encouraged to attend professional developments that address ENLs and other struggling students. Our ENL teachers attends professional development sessions offered by the District 8 and Borough Field Support Team, and by the DOE office of ENLs multiple times a year. These professional developments address issues such as compliance, supporting language objectives, interpreting data, and building background knowledge and language acquisition using the CCLS. Our Speech providers also attend annual conferences and cultural workshops that address the needs of ENLs and training on how to score the NYSESLAT. The Parent Coordinator is encouraged to attend Professional Developments that help him support our ELL families. Professional Development for teachers will occur periodically throughout the year. Professional development is available for the teachers of ENLs including the ESL teachers by the network on how to engage the ENLs in the Common Core Learning Standards. The new curriculum adopted by the school for ELA, is the Teachers College Readying and Writing Project, and KEMS (math) and EngageNY, also offers training sessions. The teachers of these subjects along with the ESL teacher will each attend a total of 6 of these training sessions. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. We advise our staff on the barriers that ENLs face to encourage patience and empathy. Teachers are shown test scores from NYSESLAT modalities so they can target their instruction to meet students' needs. Our ELL teacher is in the classroom of every teacher who teaches ENLs weekly or biweekly. Our ELL teacher is always available to offer help and suggestions. In order to support the transition from middle to high school, our ENL teachers and Guidance Counselor take personal interest in making sure our 8th grade ENLs are accepted to schools that will cater to their academic and emotional needs. Together they assist the students with the high school application process and choosing school where they can flourish. The Guidance Couselor meets with the ENL teacher to go over student needs as well as any pertininet information necessary on individual students to ensure high school success. School information is reviewed as it is sent to us on the new school that cater to ENLs. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  Every Monday and Tuesday we have protected time allocated for professional development. This year we are targeting how to set up language goals and scaffold instruction with the new CCLS initiative. Throughout the course of the year, we plan to focus on ENLs during this professional development time in order to comply the CCLS, instructional learning shifts, and DOE requirements. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? There are four scheduled parent meetings for the school year. During this time the LAP team meets with parents of ELL students to discuss progress and any changes that may need to occur. These meetings are in September, November, February and May. Every Tuesday is Parent Engagement where ENL and subject teachers can meet with our ENL parents 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. It is a goal of our school to create a sense of community. In order to work towards this goal, we welcome parents to attend family orientations, parent teacher nights, scholar achievement celebrations, monthly PTA meetings, and monthly workshops. Parents are free to come to the school to meet with teachers, our Parent Coordinator or any other administrator to discuss the needs of their children. We are also in the process of creating class websites so that all parents are able view class updates and assignments. We have numerous in-house staff that are English-Spanish bilingual who help our ELL students and their families during parent teacher nights, IEP meetings, and orientations. All school notices and program information are written in the native language of the families. If translations are necessary for a language other than Spanish, we first reach out to our staff then to the staff of the other two schools in our building for someone who speaks said language. If we do not have a translator on premises, we use the translation services provided by the department of education. Our Parent Coordinator also provides information about ENL classes offered in the New York Public Library. Our Parent Coordinator is bilingual and regularly available to make sure parents stay informed in their native language. Our ELL population is primarily Spanish speaking. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Dyon Rozier, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 96  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Mathematics Preparatory School DBN: 08x375 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Dyon T. Rozier Title Principal Paulette Christie Assistant Principal Ceasr Rosa Parent Coordinator Ademola Akesode ENL/Bilingual Teacher Melinda Paredes Parent Teresa Lewis Teacher/Subject Area Jonathan Derr Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Roger Crawford School Counselor Karen Ames Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Desra Govia Other IEP Teacher Michelle Lorenz Other ENL Teacher Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 . . 6/26/18 6/26/18 . 6/26/18 6/26/18 . 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 97  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X375 School Name: The Bronx Mathematics Preparatory S Superintendent: Dr. Karen Ames The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (Cesar Rosa) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. When a student enters the building, an intake form is given to the parent to fill out which asks the questions about home language written and oral communication. When it is determined that the language is other than English, the Home Language Identification Survey is given to the family. Upon receiving the information the data is inputted into ATS and the NYSITELL is given. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 98  Language English, Spanish, Bengali, Bambara, French, and Arabic Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Newsletters( October/January/March/June), Principal's Messages about the School Overview, New York StateTesting, and Welcoming Letters (September/December/February/May) , Parent/ Teacher Conferences (September/November/February/May), Field Trips( PBIS Trips and 21 st Century Grant Trips), Parent Meetings (Monthly), After School Programs(September- October) , Student Handbook ( September), Curriculum Guides ( September) Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Teachers will translate letters to ensure information is disseminated to all members of the community. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 99  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Curriculum night occurrs in September, Face to Face meetings happen regularly in the Parent Room, Parent Teacher conferences occur in November and March, Monthly Parent meetings beginning in October - June, Daily calls to parents concerning their child's absence for the day or concerns about lateness, guidance calls and an October meeting for parents concerning the High School Articulation process plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We plan to support and provide services to our families and guardians on an going basis to ensure transparency and 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) As you enter the campus of our school, there is a welcome sign, parents guide to language access and parent's Bill Right of Rights. These posters and signs are available for the entire school community. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 100  The Parent Coordiantor provides a survey to the parents to communicate with us how we have provided services to support them with translation of oral and written communciation 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 101 
