 12X383 School Name: EMOLIOR ACADEMY Principal: MICHAEL ABBEY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Emolior Academy 321200010383 6-8 1970 West Farms Road 718-842-2670 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 12X383 718-842-2857 Fax: Michael Abbey mabbey@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Michael Abbey EstabanVazquez Marlene Bennett Denise Loimon Bonita Dent n/a n/a Kiaribel Paralta District Information Geographical District: 12 Jacqueline Rosado Superintendent: 1970 West Farms Road, Bronx NY 10460 Superintendent’s Office Address: jrosado3@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-328-2310 Phone Number: 718-542-7736 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Nancy Saffer Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462/ One Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: nsaffer @schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-7776 / 718-741-8895 718-828-6280   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Denise Loimon Esteban Vazquez MarleneBennett n/a Bonita Dent n/a n/a Kiaribel Paralta Pauline Leslie Miosotis Cruz *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/UFT Member/UFT Member/UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Doris Canela Jason Rodriguez Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Section 4: CEP Overview It is the mission of Emolior Academy to provide a high-quality, rigorous and meaningful education for all scholars. Each scholar will be expected to succeed within the bounds of his or her abilities and chosen educational goals. All scholars will be given the tools to be life-long learners, and taught to function as productive members of our diverse global society.   Vision It is the vision of Emolior Academy to create a learning environment where all scholars are motivated to find their purpose, to clearly see their worth, and to realize their full potential as learners. 2018-2019 Instructional Focus Increase teacher capacity to provide rigorous instruction and time for scholars to work productively and make their thinking visible through reading and writing. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Emolior Academy is a 6 to 8 college preparatory middle school with a strong focus on Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics skills located in the West Farms neighborhood of the Bronx.. Our focus on rigorous instruction prepare our scholars to be ready for High School and experiences well beyond into their college years. All students are empowered to prepare for the specialized high school entrance exams starting from 6th grade and also take to a minimum of two regents level courses in the 8th grade. We believe in a parent-school partnership and encourage our parents to take an active role in their child's academic experiences. We are a uniform school and through our partnership with The South Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation (SoBro) we offer a free after-school and summer program for all students. Students also participate in an advisory program and our yearly college visits for all grades. Our parent-teacher conferences are scholar lead and parental participation is expected. Through the use of the Emolior Academy school app and Skedula, parents are able to communicate with teachers directly and access students progress reports to determine appropriate interventions when needed. Saturday Academy The Emolior Academy Saturday Program begins each year in November and ends in June, it is a 24 week program open to all students. The program takes place from 8:30 am - 12:30 pm. During the 24 weeks it is offered, students prepare for the New York State ELA & Math exam, Regents (Integrated Algebra, Living Environment, and US History) and SHSAT (6th & 7th grade scholars). Breakfast and lunch are provided to our students. 2016-2017 School Quality Review  Capacity Framework Alignment Strengths: High Expectations/ Curriculum/ Pedagogy According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Review, Emolior Academy ensures that school leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the school community through the professional calendar by defining rigor for all stakeholders, supporting teachers with planning and preparation, teacher inter-visitations with mutual accountability. We have developed a clear path connected to college and career readiness for students and it is conveyed through parental workshops, SLT meetings, our Saturday Academy program and student assemblies. Also, teaching practices and philosophies are communicated and are aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching. The school community collaborates with one another to define rigorous instruction and it's alignment to the common core standards by mapping all units on ATLAS Rubicon and Google drive. Expectations for lesson planning and assessments of students are shared with staff through a series of professional learning workshops during and after school. 0   Capacity Framework Alignment Focus Areas: Use of Assessment According to the 2016-2017 school Quality Review, our school has had a number of assessment practices in place but they lack consistent across content areas. According to the reviewer, "Students receive actionable feedback regarding their academic achievements. Classroom practices, such as checks for understanding and student self-assessment, are employed to meet the needs of all learners, but as of yet have not offered a clear portrait of student mastery" Based on the reviewer information, we have structured our assessment practices to support all students and to bring consistency among teachers in their specific content areas. The school demographics are as follow: Grade(s) presently in school: 6-7-8 Attendance % to date 92% Demographics: Demographics: Ethnicity % Gender % IEP students % ELLs Hispanic 65% Black 27% Asian 3% White 1% American Indian 5% 50% Female – 50% Male 23% 22% 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. At Emolior, we serve a diverse population of ELLs, SWD and a number of students who are below state standards in reading and math. Approximately 25% of our population are classified as students with disability. Students with an individual learning plan receives full instruction in their respective settings including self contain, Collaborative Team Teaching, and Special Education Teacher Support Services. All students with an IEP receives their full mandated services such as counseling, speech, physical and occupational therapy. Teachers use a number of differentiated strategies to breakdown instruction into smaller manageable task for students in these settings. We also serve a number of students who are English Language Learners. Currently, 21% of our overall population are ELLs. Our strategy to support all ENL students is the push in/pull out model with a strong emphasis on language and vocabulary acquisition. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. During the 2015-2016 school year, only 12% of our students were proficient in ELA. Since then, we have developed a number of strategies and interventions to support students' reading and writing comprehension. Even though we have not met our goals, 23% of our students are proficient in ELA. We have also reduced the number of level ones in ELA by 20% compared to our 2015-2016 school year data. 1  Based on the 2018 Advance observational data, 92% of teachers are effective in planning and preparation compared to the 2016 school year. We have developed a number professional learning teams for teacher support on planning and pedagogy. This has been an area of growth. This year, our teachers will continue to focus on: Students justifying their thinking during class discussions  Using more open-ended questions designed to promote student thinking  Give adequate wait time for students to respond to questions   Use of formative assessment strategies  The use of established assessment criteria (to self and peer assess)  Give feedback to students during conferencing using student tracker  Check for student understanding throughout the lesson 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X383 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 259 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 44 44 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 88.8% % Reduced Lunch 19.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 5.8% 62.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.1% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.08 0% 5% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 23.2% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A YSH YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 6 7 88.5% 2.3% 28.2% 24.7% 3.5% 5.8% 2 40% 5.9 13.9% 55% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A YSH YSH NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Within the past 3 years, we have focused on building the capacity of our teachers to improve literacy for all students across content and grade teams. During the 2015-2016 school year, 12% of our students were proficient on the NYS ELA exam. Since then, our data for proficiency increased to 25% for the 2016-2017 school year and after loosing a few teachers, we dipped to 23% for the 2017-2018 school. This year, we will continue to build the capacity of our new ELA teachers to improve proficiency and increase the rigor for all students. In our ELA curriculum, we want students to to continue to promote the idea of developing the joy of reading and writing and in an effort to share these ideas with others without judgement. Additionally, the most recent data from our 2016-2017 quality review states that, " The school’s curriculum is implemented consistently across all grades, and holds all students accountable to meeting learning expectations, including students with disabilities and English Language Learners, additional supports are provided as needed. Teachers work to provide students with daily opportunities to hone their critical thinking skills, thus preparing them for the rigor and demands of higher education and providing them with the skills they will need to be successful in a global and competitive workforce and society." This school year, we have implemented a number of programs such as Reading Recovery, Rewards, STARI, and I-Ready for our struggling readers during our Academic Intervention periods. According to our September 2018 DRP results, 65% of our 7th and 8th grade students moved up one grade level compared to our June 2018 DRP assessments. Our priority for the 2018-2019 school year is improving mathematics instruction. In looking at our school's most recent scores, our students continue to struggle in math. Last year, out of 92 incoming 5th graders, 74% were level ones and 23% level twos. The average proficiency rating was below 1.4. Even though a number of students from this cohort did not move from level one to level two, the proficiency rating increased from 1.4 to 1.89. Within our math curriculum this school year, we will promote inquiry and critical thinking. To remedy this, we have adopted Envision as our curriculum. Additionally, based on feedback received from PPO and Quality Review visits, we have partnered with LDC to develop rigorous task aligned to the Common Core State Standards. We will also use the progress tracker from the District to track each student progress towards mastery in each standard per grade. Other Key Strategies:  We developed a collaborative culture where data is analyzed, student needs are discussed and goals with action plan/ next steps are developed. Ex. Grade and inquiry teams.  We use common assessments which are analyzed by teacher teams to develop our goals and action plan. This process utilizes results and student work products to determine meaningful goals and design effective action plans to meet them. Ex: Data from performance series, benchmark assessments, pre/post unit assessments and ready. 4  We use data tracking sheets to monitor student progress across grades and subjects. Information contained within these tracking sheets enable teachers to identify strengths and trends that are used to guide our TI grouping, revise curricular and reteach lessons as needed.  An analysis of student writing across grades and subject areas indicated a lack of rigorous writing in our ELA classrooms. This led to the idea of incorporating a structured time in teacher’s schedule for writing in the ELA and Social Studies classrooms.  Each month, the instructional team meets to analyze the school wide data and use the data to support our after school and Saturday school instruction. As for the teacher created data, we use it during our collaborative inquiry teams. Teachers analyze the tasks given to students each week and determine strategies to support students to learn collaboratively and individually.  We use I-Ready to assess students three times a year school wide. We adopted this practice this year because we believe that it will give us accurate data on where our students are academically and also serves as an intervention tool to help our students master lacking skills. In addition, in each content area, our teachers begin each unit with a pre-assessment task, mid-assessment task, and a post assessment tasks to help students master specific concepts the subject area. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 6% increase in student Math and ELA assessments as measured by beginning, middle and end of the year DRP and I-Ready benchmark assessments 5 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During the 2018-2019 school year, the principal will align budgetary sources to create Book Clubs, Regents Prep programs, Specialized High-School test prep, after-school classes, and Saturday programs with funding for per-session for supervisors and teachers to support all students, including special programs for ELLs, SWDs and the bottom 1/3. Provide Professional Learning for teachers to develop differentiated curriculum to support ELLs, SWD, bottom 1/3, and high need student subgroups. Align budgetary resources to purchase computers for students to use I-Ready as an intervention program to support ENL, SWD, SIFE, STH and high need student subgroups. Use the District Tracker to track students progress during inquiry team meetings to determine strategies to improve students outcomes. During the 2018-2019 school year, the administrative team will build teacher capacity to use ATLAS Rubicon to map curricular aligned to CCLS, task development, assessment and feedback to students. Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, Student in Temporary housing, and our bottom 1/3 Teacher Team meetings will begin in September 2018, and each grade will meet twice a week to determine strategies to support our bottom 3rd including ELLs, SWD, and STH. Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, Student in Temporary housing, and our bottom 1/3 Four times each month on Monday's, during professional learning time. September 2018 to June 2019 Peer Collaborative Teachers Model Teachers Generation Ready Coach IEP Teacher Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teachers Generation Ready Consultant MSQI & LDC Coach Principal and Assistant Principal Peer Collaborative Teacher On a quarterly basis, the principal and grade teams will analyze and aggregate scores from the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment by grade, subject and department in order to share findings with teachers. Students with Disabilities, English Once a week, From September 6 Language Learners, Student in Temporary housing, and our bottom 1/3 2018-June 2019 Model Teachers Generation Ready Consultant MSQI & LDC Coach Principal and Assistant Principal All math teachers Teachers will meet in their teacher teams to revise/update their math curriculum maps and plan out when they are going to utilize the Ready and Engage question back as a supplement to Envision curriculum. All students, Including ICT, SWD, ENL and STH September to June 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At Emolior Academy, we pride ourselves on having a strong community and a clear high instructional expectation for all students. We have established a college and career readiness culture where students visit a college campus on each grade level and set goals towards their academic success during the school year. We celebrate our students using our honor roll assemblies, and challenge our high performing students to take regents course during and after school. We consistently communicate high expectations every day with our advisory program. All classrooms have data walls, strong consistency, grading policy across school. The systems of accountability that we have established for our expectations are delineated to staff, student, parent and stakeholders. We visit classrooms to ensure protocols are followed and provides professional development as needed.  Key Strategies: The practices to support college and career readiness in our school are: Advisory, trips, dress for success. Expectations for note taking, engage in research reports, regents courses, guidelines for rigorous student work, and work is handed in on time. To ensure that teachers receive on going feedback we provide interim, progress report and use of Skedula where parents can see student grades and behavior and updates on informal parent meetings. We Use our school App to provide key information to parents and the parent coordinator sends out weekly updates via email, school messenger, and phone messaging, texts, weekly meetings on Tuesday with staff. We use our open school night and our Scholar Led Conference to help families understand our rigorous curriculum. At the end of each marking period, teachers provide parents with a"Parent Guide" with information about thier class and the work expected during the marking period. Also, each quarter, students demonstrate their learning in front of their parents during our scholar led conferences. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Common planning periods will be embedded into the school day schedule. 2. Visible thinking strategies will be used across disciplines to promote interdisciplinary instruction and teaming. 7  3. Teacher Team/Inquiry Periods will be scheduled to promote data analysis. 4. Monday professional development sessions will be scheduled to support enhancing teacher practices. 5. Common planning periods will be established to support teachers meeting by department to create and implement rigorous units of study. 6. Cabinet meeting times will be scheduled on Fridays to evaluate calendar of collaborative practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By June 2019, the school will administer three I-ready benchmarks in October, January, and March to assess student progress and use the data to inform the revision of unit plans and curriculum. This development will improve teacher awareness of student outcomes during data teams, resulting in a 10% increase of students receiving Saturday Academic Support Services in Math and ELA. Each week, school principal and cabinet team will evaluate Common Planning Time, Teacher Grade Teams and Interdisciplinary Team times within the school program as well as evaluate professional developments every Monday along with assessing the Professional Development plans. ● Every quarter, an assessment and aggregation of scores from the Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) assessment will be made as well as collect and assess teacher team data by grade, subject and departments to provide comparisons. ● Curriculum departments, teacher teams and Assistant Principal will develop rigorous units of study via the teacher team and common planning time monthly. ● Principal and Assistant Principal will Implement a quarterly calendar of meetings to address and inform collaborative practices. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) By February 2019, there will be a 3% increase in student scores in DRP and I-ready assessment as measured by the middle of the year Math and ELA benchmarks. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? We believe that the students' academic successes are directly correlated to a supportive school environment and we know that students who want to come to school and do so consistently, improve their academic skills. Based on the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide, we were rated proficient in Quality Review 1.4 and well developed under 3.4 in the category of supportive environment. Our attendance rate is over 90% and 94% of parents trust both teachers and administration. Even though we are proud our environment, there are a number of priorities we currently addressing to achieve both our academic goals and environmental goals so we can help all students feel safe and respected. Priority Increase student attendance rate.   Build teacher capacity to implement PBIS and motivate students to practice positive behavior in the classroom and hallways  Continue to increase the number of students reaching proficient levels on New York State ELA assessment by providing additional support on Saturdays Support and address students social emotional needs using our Advisory Program and Restorative Justice   Provide students with culturally relevant texts to support and motivate them to read independently each day  Evaluate the effectiveness of the advisory program and the implementation of the Code of Collaboration to determine if the programs have led to academic or behavioral success for students.  Analyzed data to identify and address patterns and root causes of behavioral issues to establish a safe, healthy environment that promotes the social and emotional well-being of all students including those identified as at risk.  Enlist parents' support to ensure students are in school on time every day. In addition, given the challenge of supporting the literacy development of our students, we want to extend this support beyond the physical borders of our school by inviting the parents to fully participate in their children’s literacy education and achievement. We want our parents to know that there is tremendous value in reading to or with a child and by doing so, they share and support their child’s success. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 2% increase in student attendance as measured by our daily attendance reports in ATS. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All classroom teachers will discuss the importance of attending school daily during advisory on a weekly basis. All students, including September 2018 to June 2019 Attendance Committee/SIT Team Guidance Counselor, School leaders Parent Coordinator, All Teachers Attendance Teacher Attendance committee will meet twice a week to monitor attendance and follow up on individual students. Parent Coordinator will maintain Monthly Attendance Bulletin Board and acknowledge highest attendance class and students each month. Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and STH Students who are chronically absent will be tracked by our attendance teacher who will make home visits to determine proper actions or next steps. Based on student outcomes for the five instructional periods as outlined in our school's assessment plan, teachers will tailor their instruction based on student needs to further their development and progress. Teachers will reach out to chronically absent students on Tuesdays to provide support and motivate parents to send their kids to school as part of our parental engagement plan. The school will track student attendance and behavior referrals because we understand that both of these can lead to a decrease in student performance due to less time on task. 0  Teachers will utilize Overcoming Obstacles strategies to encourage positive student behavior as well as strategies to help students reach out to the school community if they are in need rather than missing school. The attendance Team will discuss student patterns and trends of specific students attendance to determine strategies for improvement each week. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The PTA, SLT and Parent Coordinator will conduct monthly workshops to engage parents to support students in developing healthy (social emotional) habits in our school, to determine the issues our parents are facing and why students are missing school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administration and teachers will coordinate awards at all quarterly assemblies for perfect attendance Attendance incentives for monthly attendance challenge per class Administration and staff will develop incentive programs for students with the highest attendance each quarter. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 1% increase in student attendance as measured by attendance reports. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1  Daily attendance reports from ATS Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our 2018 School Quality Guide reported, “Collaborative Teachers” as areas one of our demonstrated strength. We scored above 90% in cultural awareness and inclusive classroom instruction. Our Quality Review from the 2015-2016 school year evaluated teachers “proficient” at working well with each other. We built on these strengths as well as our strong metrics in the Trust indicator, which at 84% overall and teacher- teacher trust – 89% (citywide average 88%). During the 2017-2018 school year teachers collaborated in examining student work to increase rigor in reading and writing. Teachers also collaborated to refine our curriculum and provide feedback to each other on their assessment practices during inquiry teams. Strengths:  Teachers collaborating during inquiry team meetings to enhance their teaching practice  Teacher refinements of curriculum and pacing  Needs:  Identify a common tool or structure to track student work/progress school-wide to improve Math and ELA instruction  Continue to utilize the collaborative inquiry protocol to encourage consistency when reviewing student work  To differentiate PD to meet the needs of individual teachers who are developing in component 3b In order to expand this success we want to continue with our collaborative inquiry structure and focus more closely on building teacher capacity to effectively assess all students and provide specific feedback to students to improve their outcomes. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all math and ELA teachers will use the district standard base progress monitoring tool/tracker to track student progress on specific standards in math and ELA during inquiry cycles as measured by a 5% increase on I-ready and DRP mid-year assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal will meet with Teacher leaders to discuss the progress with collaborative inquiry and the use of the progress monitoring tracker twice a month. All Teacher leaders September 2018 to June 2019 School Principal, APs, Teacher leaders, Coaches School leaders will regularly observe teachers informally and formally based on cycles throughout the academic year and give timely feedback to improve pedagogy. coaches All Teachers September Principal and APs 2018 to June 2019 New teachers will receive mentoring each week to effectively implement the tracker All Teachers September Teachers 2018 to June 2019 Administration Teachers will analyze and track student work based on standards being addressed. Upon their findings teachers will adjust their practice to improve their pedagogy and student outcomes Teachers September 2018 to June 2019 School Principal, APs, Teacher leaders, Coaches on a weekly basis Teachers and teacher assistants will engage in ongoing professional learning series to build their capacity with the use of the standard base tracker and task development. AP's, teachers and Teacher Assistants September 2018 to June 2019 Principal, Coaches, APs and Teacher leaders on a weekly basis 3b – Parent and Family Engagement on a weekly basis How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Send home quarterly progress reports and parent guides to inform parents of student progress and learning strategies parents can use to support their children. 4  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Common Planning Periods and weekly one to one coaching meetings.  Detailed administrative schedule to support observations on a daily basis  Summer Professional Development sessions Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The teacher leaders will work with APs to create an inter-visitation schedule for teacher to teacher visits each week. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The school will use DRP, Ready and I-ready benchmarks to assess and monitor progress quaterly Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. For the past two years, all staff members at Emolior Academy have worked hard to main a clear and cohesive vision on planning and preparation. Based on our 2015-2016 Quality Review, we are proficient in rigorous instruction and effective school leadership compared to previous years. Our school communicates a high expectation for planning and designing coherent instruction. In an effort to establish consistency, the administrative team will continue to provide teachers the opportunity to engage in collaborative meetings to focus on best practices that will improve learning and student outcomes. According to our Quality Review and PPO, there is an inconsistency in our assessment structures among teachers on a daily basis. Also as an administrative team, there is a need to ensure consistency in the type, amount and quality of feedback provided to teachers during the post observational conference. This year we need to pay additional attention to deepening student reflection as evidenced in bulletin board displays, student portfolio summaries and project reports. Additionally, although exit slips are evidently used in classrooms, insufficient time is allotted for students to self-assess during the lesson, which prevents diverse learners from understanding specific next-steps to achieve mastery and accelerate their performance level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, teachers will improve by 1 level in Danielson component 3d as measured by Advance observational tool. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development team will create, monitor, and adjust the PD plan which will align topics to the Danielson component 3d All teachers September to June Principal/APs Utilize the NTC - Mentoring program to support new teacher development. 1st and 2nd year teachers September to June NTC Mentor Utilize weekly common planning periods among teachers, coaches and administration to develop a clear vision on assessment practices Build the capacity of administration by utilizing the support of the Teacher Development and Evaluation Coach -TDEC from the district office. All Teachers September to June Teacher leaders, APs, Principal Admin September to June Principal/AP Provide professional development for teachers on domain 3 to support student engagement, question and discussion, and assessment of instruction. Teachers During Monday PD-3 times a month. Peer Collaborative Teachers Model Teachers Generation Ready Coach 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On a monthly basis, parents will be invited to our parent events to discuss concerns and ideas on how to improve student outcomes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional articles and instructional materials (books, etc.);DOE instructional leads; consultants from NTN and Generation Ready 7  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 20% increase of teacher inter-visitation as measured by inter-visitation log Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrative observations and inter-visitation logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to school Quality Guide and the NYC School Survey, overall 94% of our parents trust the work we are doing with their children and 82% believe that we include them in our school community. As for parent outreach, 90% of our parents responded positively. We have developed clear structures to make all students feel welcome and supported. Each student is known by their advisor and they are able to find an adult to talk to when in need. The use of the student identification and our school wide e-mail system support our students with communicating with teachers after school hours and on weekends. Student’s often state that they appreciate the teaching and learning that goes on at the school and believe the school is helping them build their communication skills. The feeling of belonging to a family is also a sentiment voiced often by both students and parents when they visit our school. As a result of the positive culture established, data indicates improved student attendance and low suspension rates with little to no bullying incidences reported. This year we would like to make data more accessible to parents so that they can make informed decisions to support their children at home. Although we positively outreach to parents, our focus will be to assist parents in analyzing data as it refers to their child(ren). It is our goal to bridge the gap in supporting parents to understand what their children are learning and how they are fairing compared to other students in the district, city and state.  Needs:  Sharing this information with parents to help them understand how data is being used as well as how best they can support their child's learning.  A medium for sharing data with parents that is meaningful and supports parents' understanding of what children are learning and what they need to learn by the end of the school year. Also, based on our Quality Review, It is recommended that the we effectively plan to communicate with all stakeholders in multiple languages. Families must have access to information regarding student’s progress in multiple languages so they can monitor their progress, understand and support their children's progress towards mastery. We also should provide professional development opportunities for all staff on topics related to developing and maintaining partnerships with families and the community. Communication to all families should be in appropriate languages to ensure that families and the community play a larger role in promoting academic and social and emotional developmental health. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 10% increase in parent attendance at school functions as measured by sign in sheets from parent coordinator events and Scholar Led Conferences. 9  0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Throughout the 2018-2019 school year, the principal and various staff members will conduct parent trainings on the use of Skedula and NYS Parent Portal Teachers, parents, students The Guidance counselor and Parent Coordinator will design training modules and host monthly information sessions with parents and students regarding information, enrollment and support of after-school enrichment programs. The workshop materials used will be translated and interpretation support will be provided in the dominant languages spoken by parents in the school. Ensure parent notices and correspondences are communicated in a timely manner. Parents Students Parents Students Example: Progress Reports, Parent Guide, NYS ELA and Math Data, DRP and I-Ready Data Monthly from September to June September to December Principal, APs, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor Principal, APs, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor September to June Principal, Staff, Teachers, PC, APs Provide busing for Parents and students to attend citywide High School Fair Parents October 2018 Principal, APs, Parent Coordinator, Support parents with the new NYC Enrollment Portal on weekends to register their children and apply for high school. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Students Teachers, parents, students September 2018-December 2018 Guidance Counselor Principal, APs, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. SOBRO: South Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1   Purchase and use Skedula/Pupil Path as our grading system  Purchase school messenger and EA app to communicate with parents on a daily basis  DOE Translator for written communication  Supplies for multilingual workshops Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Pre-post attendance data for workshops, PTA meetings and scholar led conferences Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent logs to Events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) - State exam data, Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) - Classroom observations, ● Guided-Reading/ Reciprocal Reading - Common assessments ● Word Generation ● LDC - DRP data, report card information, - ● ATLAS Rubicon - Teacher referral, I-Ready - Department referral Mathematics - State exam data, ●LDC - Classroom observations, ●I-Ready ● ATLAS Rubicon When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) ● Students receive AIS based service (described above) for an hour-long session, twice a week as part the Emolior Academy afterschool programming. (Beginning in January as part of our school test preparation) ● Students also receive the same AIS based service (described above) for a 2-hour long session, once a week on Saturdays as part the Emolior Academy 7 week ELA State Assessment preparation programming. ● Morning program ● Extended day 2x per week Afterschool program ● Students receive AIS based service (described above) for an hour-long session, twice a week as part the Emolior Academy ● Students receive AIS services through an Emolior Academy skills class and push-in intervention service targeting literacy, reading and writing skills development / reinforcement through our own developed program. This program includes skill practice worksheets sheets, enrichment exercises; Literacy based games, test preparation, re-teach and goal setting. ● Small Group Instruction ● One-to-one ● Small group tutoring ● Students receive AIS services through push-in intervention service targeting numeracy skills development / 3  - Common assessments ● Word Generation Small Group - DRP data, report card information, - - Teacher referral, - Department referral Science - State exam data, ● Achieve 3000 - Classroom observations, ● Guided-Reading/ Reciprocal Reading - Common assessments - DRP data, report card information, - - Teacher referral, ● Word Generations ● Small Group Instruction Social Studies - Department referral - State exam data, ● LDC - Classroom observations, ● Guided-Reading/ Reciprocal Reading - Common assessments ● Word Generations - DRP data, report card information, - ● reinforcement through our own developed program. This program includes skill practice worksheets sheets, enrichment problems, mathematics based games, test preparation, re-teach and goal setting. ● Small Group Instruction ● One-to-one Small group tutoring Grade 7 and 8 after school study program focuses on Science content necessary in preparation for the 8th grade State Science Assessment and portfolio projects. afterschool programming. (Beginning in January as part of our school test preparation ) ● Students also receive the same AIS based service (described above) for a 2-hour long session, once a week on Saturdays as part the Emolior Academy 7 week Math State Assessment preparation programming . ● Morning program ● Extended day 2x per week Afterschool program Morning program Afterschool program Saturday Academy: Project-based learning Morning program Afterschool program Saturday Academy: Project-based learning Grade 7 after school study program focuses on Social Studies content necessary in preparation for an Emolior Academy developed 8th grade Social Studies Assessment and portfolio projects 4 - Teacher referral, - Department referral - SBST referral, ● Cabinet team - Teacher referral, ● Crisis intervention team - Dean referral, parent request, ● RTI At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) ● 504 Accommodation Referrals Small group guidance Whole class intervention w/ guidance team - AP referral, - Principal referral, - agency referral - Attendance Records (ATS) - OORS reports - Common Assessments - Parental input - Student Portfolios Pull out, push in services Before, during and after school conferencing In school and after school counseling is available in a group and individual setting. Target scholars who are undergoing similar behavioral and academic challenges. Outside counseling referrals are provided for those found to be in need of additional services. Services provided include: conflict resolution, crisis intervention, family support services, and referrals to community-based organizations along with classroom management support to teachers. One on one conferencing Anti-bullying Initiative 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 25 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Provide students with Uniforms, book bags, school supplies, immunization support from Metro Health, Saturday academic Intervention, Tutoring, High School Preparation and Counseling. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. ● Emolior Academy will utilize the New Teacher Center (NTC) model to provide high quality research based mentoring to all new teachers (1-3 years) aligned to the Danielson Framework for teaching. All administrators will actively engage in the NTC workshops to hone their coaching skills and capacity to provide high leverage feedback that accelerates teacher growth. Work with the Teaching Fellows and Teach For America programs to recruit teachers interested in working in an urban school setting ● Collaborate with District Support and NLNS to identify potential teachers and staff members ● Utilize advertisement mediums such as the Times to advertise vacancies and identify potential teacher and staff members ● Attend recruitment fairs hosted by Department of Education ● Work with Teach for America and Teaching Fellows programs to identify newly trained teachers ● Allocate funding for one instructional coach to provide customized on-site support to teaching staff through modeling, observations, and immediate feedback ● Allocate Title 1 funding to hire an additional content teacher to provide small group instruction by reducing class sizes across entire 7th grade ● Utilize Emolior Academy Intermediary resources to acquire curriculum design professional development services from Generation Ready ● Utilize a schedule that incorporates weekly common planning time across content areas ● Utilize Title 1 funding to hire a DOE sponsored teacher mentor to provide support services for all new and 2nd year teachers 8  ● Utilize a technology sharing site to post all content curriculum maps, rubrics and unit projects ● Participation in summer and yearlong Emolior Academy developed Individualized Professional Development program (EIPD) aimed at increasing teacher instructional capacity on topics such as Project Based learning, differentiation and student feedback ● Teacher recruitment through DOE screening process 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Build teacher capacity to design instruction aligned to CCSS on ATLAS Admin and teacher leaders will work with teachers to analyze data, provide individual mentoring or coaching to English language arts (ELA), mathematics, and science teachers. Train teachers to use data to create baseline assessments; pre and post assessments to support instruction for students throughout the years. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. 9  A committee was formed consisting of school leaders and teachers. The committee participated in professional development, discussed guidelines for the selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and what would be appropriate for our students. Teachers received professional development from principal on how to use the assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers will participate in data talks with school leaders to review student progress on an 6-week cycle. The committee and teacher teams meet periodically to review data and make adjustments to the curriculum. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5, 6,and 7 Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 245,422 0 12,366.00 0 2,127,398 X x x x X Section 5, 6,and 7 Section 5, 6,and 7 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 0  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 1  2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Emolior Academy Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. [Emolior Academy] , in compliance with the new Every Student Succeed Act (ESSA), every child counts. It is Emolior's responsibility to ensure that all students are held to: 1. A challenging academic standards in math and reading 2. ENL/SWD students are given extra attention to meet their academic goals 3. Clear interventions such as Saturday Academy and after school programs are available for students who are not succeeding academically 4. Strengthen the family-school partnership through parent activities, GED programs for parents, homework help, computer courses and the PTA. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Emolior Academy ’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 3  [Emolior Academy] will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 4  ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Emolior Academy will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Emolior Academy School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Emolior Academy , in compliance with the Every Student Succeed Act (ESSA), staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 5  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 6  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 7  ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Supplemental Direct Instruction Emolior Academy is a small, neighborhood, 6th – 8th grade school committed to ensuring that all of our students achieve at the proficient or advanced level in each subject area and develop strong character qualities for the preparation to ultimately gain admission to and be successful in college. Our current student population is 272 students. As of the month of October, we have identified 53 English Language Learners of varying proficiency in our school. Currently, we have 09 students at the entering level, 12 students at emerging level, 12 students at the transitioning level, and 20 students at the expanding level of language proficiency. One of our goals at Emolior Academy is to provide quality instruction to ELL students in order for them to achieve academic proficiency in the English language. To accomplish this goal, ELLs are provided with additional opportunities beyond the school day to acquire maximum language acquisition in our after school programs in reading, math and science, including Academic Intervention Services to reinforce skills in all content areas. The afterschool Title III program specifically will allow for differentiated instruction. Groups will be fluid depending on students’ strengths in subjects as well as their language skills. Newcomers are given special attention to ensure that their academics do not fall below their grade level while they are acquiring English. Students will receive Native Language Support and ENL instruction to ease transition to a supportive environment that responds to the immediate social, cultural, and linguistic needs of immigrant adolescents with limited schooling. Assistance is provided in ELA, Science, Social Studies, and Arts. However the focus of the afterschool and the Saturday program is both in ELA and Math. The afterschool program will consist of one ENL, one ELA and one math certified teachers. Our certified ENL teacher will be planning and teaching with the collaboration and input of the content area teachers (ELA and math) across the grades to provide assistance for all participating ELLs in alignment with the ELA and math Common Core Standards. They will collaborate on all assessment decisions, resources and overall implementation of instruction. The ENL teacher will rotate for 45 minutes to team teach with everyone of the content teachers. We will use IReady to provide rigorous, on-grade-level instruction and practice and to help meet individual student or small group needs. The afterschool program will start on October 2018 until June 2019 for approximately 20 sessions. Instructions will be delivered by three certified teachers, one ENL, one ELA, and one math teacher from 4:00 to 5:30 on Mondays through Fridays. Emolior Academy will be using other sources and funds to complement the cost of this activity. We use Reciprocal Reading as a strategy. The goal is to ensure optimal learning while focusing on the development of the content and academic language needed for the student to properly 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information navigate the learning at grade level. Reciprocal Reading and/or Collaborative Strategic Reading will be utilized to promote academic discussion and rigorous learning engagement. In addition, ELLs will receive support in ELA and Math by the ENL teachers in coordination with the Content teachers. SoBro, a community based organization will also provide enrichment activities for ELLs in the Arts (painting, drawing, sculpturing), Performance (music, dance, drama) and STEM classes and Media (digital art, and photograph). The instruction delivery from SoBro, is provided five times a week from 2:35 to 6:00 pm at no cost to title III. Additionally, we will continue with our Saturday Academy program designed specifically for the components of the NYSESLAT exam. After an intensive and successful previous Saturday Academy program conducted for ELLs in previous years, the data indicated that ELLs from beginning, intermediate and advanced levels performed well on the writing portion of the test. Students at the beginning and intermediate level showed a major increase in their scores in the area of writing. This year we will focus on our Advanced ELLs to ensure that multiple opportunities are provided to grow their language development in the four Language skills. The program will utilize the Continental’s New York ELLs Bilingual Common Core books for the 2017 NYSESLAT preparation book as well as other teacher designed interventions to focus on descriptive writing paragraph and fact-based essays as well as short and extended constructed responses. Also, students will reinforce reading comprehension strategies, academic vocabulary and speaking skills such as storytelling, response to graphic information, picture description and sentence completion. Title III program will begin in October 2018 and run through April 2019 with the ENL teachers meeting with students at the scheduled sessions according with their Language Proficiency needs. # Emolior/SoBro partnership afterschool instructional program runs from October 2018 to June 2019 Monday through Friday from 2:35 to 6:00 p.m. The Saturday Academy will start in the months of October 2018 to April 2019 (20 sessions) from 9:00 to 12:00 p.m. The focus of the program will follow that of the afterschool program in collaboration with our CBO, SoBro. The service providers will include certified ELA, math and ENL and other content teachers. The school will complement the cost of this program, using other funding source. The following supplementary materials will be purchased with Title III funds to support the program: • IREADY student books and teacher's manual. • Continental’s New York ELLs for the 2017 NYSESLAT preparation books, Annotated teacher’s edition and Audio CD. • Supplementary native language/English picture dictionaries Word by Word. Instructions in both programs will be conducted in English with native language support such as bilingual glossaries and dictionaries, peer-supports. All student attendance and assessment will be kept on file in their school Title III binder. 1  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development In order for ELLs to receive quality instruction, on-going Professional Development is an essential catalyst for providing staff with effective and proven strategies, methodology, and activities, which support academic rigor. Providing instructors with sound, essential approaches will also provide students with optimal conditions for second language acquisition. In order to provide this support for educators in our school, Professional Development will be given through monthly and weekly grade conferences. This Professional Development will continue to provide optimal research acquisition approaches in ESL, analyzing data assessments to drive instruction and implementing scaffolding strategies for quality teaching of English Language Learners. Professional development and training will also be facilitated in house by staff that specializes in language acquisition offers strategies to develop language, ESL methodologies, and differentiated instruction for ELL students. We are attempting to make training offered through Fordham University Regional Bilingual Education - Resource Networks (RBE-RNs), Bronx RBE-RN offers technical support in the identification of ELL and other State mandates. Additionally, teachers will also have the opportunity to attend ESL / ELL professional institutes and workshops such as the Quality Teaching for English Language Learners (QTEL), sponsored through Network support. This program will aid teachers with scaffolding strategies that facilitate the linguistic transition of ELL students. Our ELL teacher attends a series of instructional support strategy workshops with a special focus on QTEL Strategies, CCSS and instructional best practices for ELLs, Strategies to Improve ELL Academic Writing, and Vocabulary Development Strategies for Teachers of ELLs among others: * October 3rd: Collaborative Strategic Reading (CSR): Research Based Approach to Reading Comprehension (Grades 6 – 10) provided by DELLSS * October 06th: “Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques” by CFN 608 Achievement Coach, Juanita Rodriguez * October 20th: “Differentiated Instruction at the Classroom level” by Ms. Leslie, Special Ed. Teacher * October 27th: Language Access Coordinator Training provided by DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit * November 4th: Bolstering Advanced Literacy Skills for English Language Learners (6-8) provided by DELLSS Additionally, the ESL teacher will turnkey professional development opportunities for all teachers that work with ELLs. Because all of our teachers at Emolior Academy teach ELL students, the professional development plan is as follows: * September: “Quick and Concrete Support for ELLs” provided by Mr. Ng and Mr. Calderon, ELA teachers * October: “Newcomer's Differentiated Instruction” provided by Imagine Learning, Inc. * November: “Language Access in the schools: Resources and Protocols” provided by Ms. Monteza, ESL teacher * December: “Stages of Second Language Acquisition” provided by Ms. Ms. Monteza, ESL teacher 2  Part C: Professional Development * January: “Creating an RTI Model for ELLs’ Academic Success” provided by Ms. Monteza, ESL teacher/ Mr. Calderon, ELA teacher * February: “Co-teaching Models for ELLs at Emolior Academy” provided by Ms. Monteza, ESL teacher/Mr. Dorrance, Special Ed. teacher * March: “NYSESLAT: Overview and Components” provided by Monteza, ESL teacher All records such as attendance and agendas and hand-out materials (whenever possible) will be kept on file. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent Involvement During the 2018-2019 school year, our Parent Coordinator, Ms. Owens and ESL teacher, Ms. Monteza, will team up to reach out to Spanish- speaking parents through a series of workshops (described below) and with the support of community- based organizations and agencies like the Adolescent Health and Wellness Center from Urban Health Plan, Inc. and NYC Health Department. Additionally, parents are invited to our open school night which provides detailed information about our school, ESL program and opportunities for parents and Emolior Academy may collaborate to support our students. The parent coordinator and ELL Point Person serve as a key liaison between the Emolior community and home. Parents are encouraged to become active participants in PGA and our SLT meetings each month to voice their concerns. Meetings and conferences are scheduled on a monthly basis to keep parents informed and involved. All communication is sent in both Spanish and English via mail, flyers, telephonically and through the newsfeed of our website and Emolior App (available at Google Play and App Store for free). The following topics/event are scheduled for the first semester. These topics were based on a needs assessment provided by parents of our Parent Association and School Leadership Team: * September: Open School Night/ Clubs and afterschool programs fair (Facilitated by the Parent Coordinator, School staff and Community-based organizations) *September: "7th grade Coffee" (7th grade team meeting with parents) * October: "Child Development and Sexuality" (Facilitated by Planned Parenthood) * November: First Annual High School Fair (organized by the Guidance Counselor in collaboration with 15 schools) Our Guidance Counselor, Ms. Cruz, is proficient in both English and Spanish and communicates with parents of all immigrant ELLs at Emolior Academy. All school documents are available in English and Spanish. Translation is available at all school events. The ENL teachers and Guidance Counselor notify parents of relevant school, CBO and city-wide workshops and events by email or fliers home. The Parent Coordinator surveys parents formally at the beginning of the school year to evaluate their needs, and frequently assesses parents’ needs and satisfaction 3  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities throughout the year. In addition, the recent designation of a Language Access Coordinator, Ms. Monteza, at Emolior Academy will facilitate the access to families to language assistance services. Parents and families of ELLs are invited and involved in many celebrations and events such as our Day of Thanks, College workshops, College visits, Open houses, Talent Shows and other events that are regularly interpreted. We continue to plan varied parent events that cater to the needs of the parents and families of out ELL population. This visible involvement of parents of immigrant ELLs in our school instills in our students a sense of belonging that is often difficult to achieve when they are struggling with the native language, and shows the positive influence of our immigrant ELL community. Because the parents of immigrant ELLs, both current and former, struggle with the English language, and often, other literacy issues that may cause them hardship in helping their children in school, we offer many opportunities to parents to come into the school to learn alongside their children. We encourage parents to attend ESL and GED courses that are offered in night programs at our school as well as opportunities for parents to learn Skedula, which helps parents stay informed about their children's progress in school. Most of the workshops that we conduct are done in-house, meaning that we use the capacities of the school based and network teams to provide workshops and services to immigrant ELL parents. This year, as part of our initiative to provide language access to Limited English proficient parents, our principal, Mr. Abbey, is committed to securing appropriate translation and intervention services through the purchase of Assistive listening /wireless transmitter system to be utilized at SLT meetings, grade meetings, parent workshops, PGA meetings, and school wide events in which interpretation activities with mobile audio assistance is needed. All records will be maintained including agendas, attendance sheets and invitations in parent's preferred languages will be kept on file. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $16,376  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. After-School: $5,459: -Three teachers will be paid at teacher per-session rate to provide instruction for twenty 1.5-hour sessions Saturday Academy: $10,917 -Three teachers will be paid at teacher per-session rate to provide instruction for twenty 3-hour sessions. 4  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL The school will complement the cost of the cost of the program using other funding source $16,376 5  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Emolior Academy Borough Bronx School Number 383 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Michael Abbey Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Lord Yeboah Osei Teacher/Subject Area Natasha Vazquez Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Jacqueline Rosado Assistant Principal Denise Loimon and Persa Lukic Coach type here School Counselor Miosotis Cruz Parent type here Parent Coordinator Sheila Owens Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 328 6 Total number of ELLs 72 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 21.95%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our School uses the DRP assessment system to measure the reading levels of all students in our building. We administer this assessment three times annually. Those students that score below their grade level reading scale are adminstered the Fountas and Pinell assessment tool to assess the literacy skills of our ELLs from 6th to 8th grade. The DRP and Fountas and Pinell assessments assess student reading achievement in reading engagement, oral reading fluency, and comprehension. They provide information to identify student’s independent reading levels and the next steps to take to help scholars improve their reading skills. On last years final DRP assessment, Our ELL's as an entire school made the most significant gain of all measured student populations, outgaining the nearest population by double the growth measure. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? DRP assessment is conducted three times a year during ELA class. Information data is collected and disseminated through ELA and grade team meetings weekly. Based on the results, students are grouped at the beginning of the fall and at the beginning 7 of winter in small groups to receive tailored intervention in literacy. Administration provides full support for this school-wide assessment. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Mr. Osei, the ELL Teacher evaluates the NYSESLAT annual results and identifies the Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives(AMAOs) to measure and report on progress toward and attainment of English proficiency and academic achievement standards of our ELLs. The findings are reported back to the School Leadership Team and Content area teachers. Recommendations are made in order to improve the effectiveness of our ENL program and ELL experience at Emolior Academy which aims to provide educational opportunities that will enable the ELL to be an independent learner, successful in the classroom, and a productive member of society. Additionally, measures taken from the Annual City Report Card system helps to provide an overview of how our ENL program is progressing in comparison to our peer schools and all city schools combined. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Several times during the year, grade team teachers gather the data and analyze it through collaborative inquiry cycles to identify students' performance at different quartiles to determine what strategies and interventions will need to be provided on a timely manner to increase student achievement. As a consequence, grade team teachers are able to collaborate with each other to refine strategies and interventions drawing form their areas of expertise. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our incoming ELLs are literacy and Math speaking performing at 2nd, 3rd, and 4th grade level. Up until last year, ELLs and F-ELLs were the fastest growing population. Last year, this population performed at average, therefore we are taking a specific look to the support we have in place, our curriculum and how we monitor data from day to day classes. Additionally, we created our own writing baseline assessment, we utilize I-Ready assessment, DRP assessment, Achieve 3000 and the MYON reading program. This information is shared in our Master Data Spreadsheet in ATLAS (a web-sited file hosting service that enables users to store and share files and folders across the Internet) so every teacher has immediate access to this relevant information. Regarding the ELL Periodic Assessments, the results are analyzed by the ELL Coordinator and then, turnkey to all content area and grade teams. The information is included in the ATLAS for every teacher to see at any time 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. One of our main source of data the we utilize is the RLAT report from ATS and the information collected through the ELL Data Analysis Tool (EDAT). The rich indicators provided through EDAT inform the instructional planning for our Free-standing ENL program. These indicators are composed of language proficiency level, home language, age, IEP status, ELA and Math scores, etc. Most of our ELL students are at the intermediate or advance level of language proficiency. In our analysis of the four modalities we found that students performed well on the listening and speaking components across all the levels. Their performance level on the reading and writing portion of the test showed areas of concern. The data indicates a need to ensure that our ELL’s are provided multiple opportunities to grow their language development in all areas. In our Freestanding ENL Program, teachers of all subjects will use ENL methodologies to ensure optimal learning while focusing on the development of the academic language needed for the student to properly navigate the learning. Writing must become an integral part in all subjects in order to promote proficiency and English language competency. Our ENL and our ELA teachers must focus their efforts on providing reading, writing, speaking, and listening lessons that are supportive, differentiated, and rigorous. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? A professional development has been provided in 2017 to the whole staff about how to use the ELL Data Analysis Tool to inform their practice and differentiate instruction for ELLs. We are planning to conduct a second P.D on the use of EDAT to new teachers so they will be able to access this important source of data as well. 8  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. There are currently 72 ELL students enrolled at Emolior Academy. Students are at the Expanding, transitioning, emerging, and entering levels of English proficiency according to the NYSESLAT and/NYSITELL. The Instructional Program for ELLs is a Stand- alone ENL model and/or Integrated ENL model administered by a full-time, certified ENL teacher. They are grouped by grade, in a Heterogeneous Block model, meaning the mixed proficiency levels class travels together as a group. ELLs receive the mandated number of minutes per week (360 for Entering and emerging levels; 180 for Transitioning and Expanding; and 90 minutes for Commanding level). The ENL teacher provides Spanish NLA to support instruction when is needed. During Grade Tiered Intervention, entering and emerging ELLs are pulled-out in small groups to receive direct instruction around fluency, grammar, vocabulary, writing skills, and/or reading comprehension. Writing is the primary focus for most English Language Learners at Emolior Academy, as this is the area that scholars generally score the lowest on the NYSESLAT. Commanding, expanding ad transitioning ELLs work within the Integrated ENL model with Social Studies or Science to focus on current topics delivered during regular class, providing opportunities for the ELLs to interact with English proficient students. The ENL teacher, in collaboration with the Content area teacher, sets writing goals for each scholar and provides periodic feedback and writing instruction to push each scholar towards grade level proficiency in this area. The ENL instructor frequently meets with all teachers during our all school common planning periods as well as after school to map a plan of action on how to implement best practice strategies for the ELL students in their classrooms. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We currently have one ENL teacher who directly supports ELA and Literacy for 72 ELL students. However, content area support is given by the ENL teacher in congruence of what the content area teacher is working on during an specific unit. The ENL teacher who is fluent in: English, French, Akan, Norwegian and Arabic gives native language support to all LEP students when working on problem-based content area projects assigned by the content area teacher. The ENL teacher articulates with the Science, Social Studies, and Math Department teachers from 6-8 grade during common planning periods to ensure activities are adjusted to our ELLs, to share strategies and best practices, and to chose content-related materials and resources that could better serve our ELLs' needs. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ELA: Our goal is have students achieve the proficient level of the NYSESLAT and reach standard levels on the NY State Exams before leaving our school. To this end our focus is to continue to develop language and provide students access to various genres, reading and writing strategies, opportunities to engage in a process of “accountable” talk related to their work and a rigorous standard based curriculum. Our ESL teacher will consistently meet with ELA teachers to align their efforts. All content area teachers will also be accountable to this end. In every subject area students will be provided time to talk, read, 9  discuss and write. Lessons plans will reflect language objectives across curriculum in order to push the work. Teachers will use good questioning techniques to support and challenge the student’s thinking. The scores listed in Assessment Analysis have indicated a need to focus on bolstering literacy skills for ELL’s. We will continue to be steered by literacy, grade-level curriculum map which drives literacy instruction and Professional Development within our school. Learning strategies are provided through the four language modalities, which are particularly beneficial to English Language Learners to achieve optimum language academic proficiency. Through a range of ESL strategies and activities, ELL’s are encouraged to speak through task-oriented situations in order to interact and communicate with peers and adults. They are provided with opportunities to articulate in activities such as retelling, reporting, responding to a book or news accounts, offering an opinion, and describing (a character, or event). Strategies for developing and improving listening skills include collaborative situations utilizing question and responding techniques, note-taking, following spoken instructions, and extracting important information from a conversation. Teacher modeling includes the stress and intonation patterns of English. Improving English proficiency in literacy includes guided, shared and independent reading opportunities. Other supports for building reading fluency and comprehension include developing sight word awareness, learning letter-sound relationships and developing strategies for word attacks. Different types of writing genres are introduced, such as letter writing, poetry, narrative and informational reports through modeling and shared writing activities and mini lessons, using graphic organizers and developing word-walls to offer spelling and vocabulary support. Teachers provide students one-on-one conferencing, an optimum opportunity for providing individual meeting time to support overall structure, content, and other language demands such as grammar and vocabulary. Mathematics: When students enter our system we must quickly access the student’s mathematical knowledge in order to inform instruction. Our math instruction must focus in on developing basic mathematical skills while working towards grade level objectives. There will be a focus on the development of the academic language of math. Many of our students struggle with the language of mathematics. The work must focus on the development of the academic vocabulary and language to navigate the subject. Mathematical concepts must be introduced and reviewed using different modalities to ensure that the work is accessible to every student. Interim Assessments, unit testing, daily quizzes and portfolios; along with other data will be used throughout the year to identify areas of weakness and inform teacher planning. Like many of our mainstream students, the data indicates that ELL’s struggle with mathematical concepts and language. The focus of our instruction must be on providing students with many opportunities to experience and discuss mathematical concepts in real life hands on applications. Vocabulary and mathematical language must be utilized to help students articulate and comprehend mathematical concepts. The implication for math instruction for ELL’s and instructors is to continue to utilize instructional time blocks, Impact Math program and assessment results to plan instruction. We also strive to provide small group, differentiated instruction and present on-going Professional Development to teach effective math practices to ELL’s. Students have a wide range of developed and prior knowledge experiences. Through differentiated instruction, ELL’s are engaged in tiered activities to meet their varied needs. The levels of skills in the native language are considered when preparing lessons. Scaffolding techniques are used extensively. Students acquire more responsibility as they gain academic, communicative competence in target areas. This occurs through the use of simplified language, teacher modeling, visual graphic organizers, cooperative activities and hands-on learning, all techniques to help build literacy and academic concepts. Academic language development is achieved in a collaborative setting where ELL’s and teachers are partners in learning. Teachers provide this scaffolding support that is responsive to the students’ needs in developing academic language. Social Studies/ Science We have a Social Studies and Science textbook/workbook that are in Spanish. Content area Teachers assign certain passages that correlate to what the English speaking peers are doing. Secondly, there is a Spanish version of the textbook on CD that the teacher is assigning to ELLs to give them the opportunity to practice at home from their computers. We are in the process of ordering the Rosetta Stone Licenses, so beginning ELLs will have access to grade level materials in each class and each grade level. We hope to have that in place by December this year. There is a ESL Resource Center with a collection of books to support different topics regarding social studies and science as well. We are currently reaching out to different schools for lower level resources to support ESL instruction in social studies and science. Currently, we are getting subscriptions to three magazines for kids: Times, National Geographic, and Current Events. Lastly, for both subjects, we take a closer look at our schedules and our teaching resource to be able to match up articulation periods for the ESL teacher, and the Language Development Support teacher to work with content area teachers and give them proper resources. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? 0  Where manageable, students are given assessment in the home language along with translated materials to support instructional outcomes. We use a series of tools including digital translators, web serviced translation sites and Department of Education provided translated materials when available. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We do not have SIFE students at the moment. b. For ELLs in US schools less than three years, Mr. Osei, ENL teacher provides everyday small group instruction where instructional strategies are delivered for accelerated literacy development and for the integration of language and content. There is an ENL Resource Center with leveled materials and guided reading book sets to support vocabulary development, phonics, decoding skills, and reading strategies. In addition, our Spanish teacher provides language development support for newcomers with less than a year in US schools. We currently have 3 newcomers. c. We have 15 ELLs receiving service 4-6 years. For this group of ELLs to succeed , they must master not only English vocabulary and grammar, but also the way English is used in core content classes. The ENL teacher uses the Sheltered Instruction Approach in which an ELL has to work with knowledge of English, knowledge of the content topic, and knowledge of how the tasks are to be accomplished to develop academy literacy. d. There are 09 long-term LEPs at Emolior Academy. We tailored our push-in ENL program with these students’ needs in mind. NYSESLAT data revealed that our scholars, by and large, score proficient in every area except Writing. Thus, there is a strong focus on writing, particularly expository pieces, in the ENL small group. The small group curriculum builds on LEPs’ strengths by incorporating numerous collaborative activities and ensuring that scholars have a daily opportunity to utilize their strong listening and speaking skills. The teacher differentiates by learning style and interest to help engage scholars in the writing process. Lessons are scaffolded to build students’ background knowledge and provide abundant models of expository writing. e. Monitoring student growth with data tracking, instructional supports focused on continued ENL development and monitoring of these specific students within their heterogeneous instructional setting. Transitional support for ELL's reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT includes immersion in general education classrooms with additional scaffolding by general education teachers trained with ELL methodologies. Additional support is provided to Former ELL's for at least two years following the school year in which a student is exited from ELL status, to receive at least one half of one unit of study of ENL (90 minutes per week). Instructional programs are offered after school for FELL's in ELA and Math through The Common Core Success Academy. Transitional support for FELL's also includes testing accommodations on state exams, continued use of bilingual glossaries Former ELL's are invited to Academic Intervention Service programs after school to prepare for state exams. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? There are fifteen ELL- SWDs at Emolior Academy in the 2018- 2019 school year. These students will receive appropriate services according to their IEPs. ELL-SWDs receives Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETTS) at Emolior Academy specially designed to provide supplemental instruction to support the participation of the student with a disability in the general education classroom. In addition, we provide Speech Services (Speech/language therapy) designed to address deficits in an ELL student's auditory, processing, articulation, phonological skills, comprehension and use of semantics, syntax, pragmatics, voice production and fluency. The ENL teacher collaborates with a Special Educator who communicates IEP goals and progress and provides suggestions for differentiation. The ENL teacher coordinates scaffolding strategies and differentiation plans with the special education teacher to ensure that the information in comprehensible for all students. The school leadership team ensures that ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates ESL instruction receive appropriate program by articulating with the SETTS teacher, the Speech provider and the ENL teacher regarding services and by monitoring the Special Education Student Information System (SESIS). The ELL-SWDs take Physical Education classes with their general education peers twice a week in the gym. At a curricular and instructional level, ELL-SWDs work with the same Social Studies and Science teachers from general education, so they are exposed to different teaching styles and philosophies within the least restrictive environment. These Content area teachers differentiate their lessons to accommodate the ELL-SWDs needs. They have also lunch together, so they are able to socialize and interact with their non-disables peers. Once a week, they meet in the 1  auditorium with the rest of the school to participate in Common Circle whose mission is to develop strong character qualities for the preparation to ultimately gain admission to and be successful in College. They participate in every school- wide activity like Community Day, Field Day, Cultural trips, College tours, Artistic events such as Emolior Idol and The Talent Show. Our ELL-SWDs are well integrated and are an important component of our school family. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We utilize a schedule that allows our ELL's to receive instruction, services and intervention with students who are performing at the same fluency level regardless of grade level. We feel this approach allows us to target instruction to specific fluency levels and maximizes the usage of our ENL teacher in providing supports to all ENL students. Additionally we have generated a intervention period during the day for all students that focuses on reading fluency and comprehension. This period matches students based on reading level and not ENL designation. This allows students to interact with peers in a non-restrictive environment while allowing teachers to maximize instructional time with a homogeneous mixture of kids based solely on reading fluency and comprehension level. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention services for ELLs in ELA are offered to students scoring at beginning and low intermediate level in reading and writing to reinforce word recognition skills. Emolior offers the two following programs: 1) Wilson Reading System, a highly-structured remedial program that directly teaches the structure of the language to students who may require multisensory language instruction. 2) Imagine Learning, a web-based, supplementary curriculum for struggling readers in middle school to acquire/strengthen, apply, and generalize phonics rules for improved fluency and comprehension. Tiered Intervention (T.I) for Advanced ELL students in 7th grade is also offered. ELLs in 7th grade are exposed to Reciprocal Reading and Guided Reading models to increase academic vocabulary, build reading comprehension skills, and practice critical thinking. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We use the MSQI program that supports us with a vocabulary acquisition program in all grades called Word Generation. This is program is common core aligned with a specific focus on ESL strategies, words and approaches. This program will also incorporate a weekly writing piece and debate that is delivered by all major contents and subject areas weekly. Additionally, We will institute an ESL translation device for each student in the building to assist with language, decoding and translation services in student native languages. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Emolior Academy offers several after school and clubs activities: CBO SoBro after school program, Art club, Student Council club, Robotics, Chorus, and School Sports like Basketball and Soccer from 6-8 grades. We also provide tutoring class before and after school in every subject and content area for every grade: Math, ELA, Science, Social Studies and ESL. All ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. The CBO SoBRO provides a comprehensive after school program from Monday through Friday in which students are offered reading and math reinforcement, homework assistance, dance classes, field trips, cooking classes, etc. Mr. Osei, the ELL Teacher plans yearly a variety of support services utilizing Title III money to target ELL entering, emerging, and transitioning levels with the purpose of addressing their specific academic needs and with native language support. Reciprocal Reading, Achieve 3000 and News ELA are programs utilized to provide Common Core aligned curriculum for ELLs. Additionally, transitioning and expanding ELLs attend Saturday Academy with Mr. Osei to get test sophistication ready for the NYSESLAT. Also, ELLs have access to regular tutoring in every subject area upon request. All the clubs, tutoring, and workshops post their flyers around the school, and a master calendar is school-wide distributed with dates, times, and teachers in charge of every activity. 2  12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Media technology resources such as videos and audios (books on tape), will continue to be utilized. In addition, Emolior Academy has a Promethean Boards in every classroom. Promethean boards are interactive white boards that combine computers, overhead projectors, and televisions into one tool. Meaningful activities, videos, presentations, games, worksheets, notes, graphic organizers, etc. can all be displayed through these interactive white boards to support all ELL levels of proficiency. Also, ELLs have access to laptops, net books, mini I-pads and programs such as Word Generation, Achieve 3000 for long term and developing ELLs and Imagine Learning Language Development program for newcomers. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Spanish native support is delivered in the Free Standing ENL program to entering and emerging and transitioning ELLs only by providing translated materials, explanations, and definitions of complex content material, to better utilize ELL’s prior knowledge in their native language. Then, target vocabulary and language structure in English are emphasized through content objective and language objective planning and delivery to promote accelerated language development. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Services support and resources correspond to advanced and high intermediate ELLs’ ages and grade levels. However, due to the influx of beginner ELLs in recent months, resources are getting limited or are not tailored for this specific population. Audio visual resources and scientifically based methodology will be purchased using Title III money to create a competitive program for Beginner ELLs in order to accelerate their language development. In order to advance students’ NYSESLAT levels, we instruct students with rigorous lessons that increase their abilities in the four modalities (speaking, listening, reading, and writing) or parts of the exam. We use various textbooks and test sophistication programs that prepare students for both the NYSESLAT and ELA exams. Students are provided academic subject area instruction and materials in a variety of genres, using ESL methodology and instruction through the four modalities, in order to address the Common Core New York State ESL learning standards. We will continue to utilize Getting Ready for NYSESLAT test preparation program which provides instruction and practice in sentence structure, parts of speech, proper word usage, grammar and mechanics will also be used in order to support and boost English proficiency. Indicators of success will be results from NYSESLAT, ESL interim assessments, content grades, teacher observation, ongoing assessment, student’s goals and portfolios. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Media technology resources such as videos and audios (books on tape), will continue to be utilized. In addition, Emolior Academy has a Promethean Boards in every classroom. Promethean boards are interactive white boards that combine computers, overhead projectors, and televisions into one tool. Meaningful activities, videos, presentations, games, worksheets, notes, graphic organizers, etc. can all be displayed through these interactive white boards to support all ELL levels of proficiency. Also, ELLs have access to laptops, net books, mini I-pads and programs such as Word Generation, Achieve 3000 for long term and developing ELLs and Imagine Learning Language Development program for newcomers. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELL student are given a tour around the school to get them familiar with the premises and the staff. Mr. Osei, the ELL Teacher answers their questions and concerns and invites them to keep in contact beyond regular group sessions (e.g: lunch time, recess, after school programs, etc.)to make them feel valued and supported and to address any concern and/or clarify new routines and expectations from Emolior Academy. The ENL teacher keeps in contact with newly enrolled ELL’s parents through cell phone and e-mail communication to know more about the family culture and beliefs. 6th ELL scholars who are enrolled before the beginning of the school year are able to enjoy a Welcome party organized by Sheila Owens, the Parent Coordinator where ELL’s family and school staff get the time to introduce each other to build school culture. Also, an Open School Night is hosted by the school staff the first week of school in which newly enrolled ELLs and their families are able to meet the teachers and know about after school programs. Translation and Interpretation is provided by Mr. Osei, the ELL Teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? 3  Spanish as a Foreign Language or language elective is offered to our ELLs. The vast majority of our ELL population are Spanish heritage speakers and Spanish dominant speakers. They enjoy the class because they feel they contribute with their base knowledge to the school culture and they invite and engage peers from different ethnic backgrounds to explore and interact in Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Emolior Academy does not have a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Training is offered through the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support which offers technical support in the identification of ELL and other State mandates. Intensive training and on-going meetings for the ELL Coordinator and Compliance Liaison are held periodically. Additionally, teachers will have the opportunity to attend ENL / ELL professional institutes and workshops such as the Quality Teaching for English Language Learners (QTEL), sponsored by the DOE. This program will aid teachers with scaffolding strategies that facilitate the linguistic transition of ELL students. In addition, training and on-going technical assistance for school- based administrators and supervisors are strongly encouraged through opportunities developed by DELLs such as ELLs in the RTI Institute that provides instruction in core programs, assessment, interventions, building the school infrastructure, etc. ELA teachers receiving professional development on our Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) have been looking at how our work directly relates to and affects ELL students and that information is turnkey to all staff throughout the year.The ELL Coordinator attends several event sponsored by the DOE such as the “English Language Learners with Disabilities: Assessment, Placement, and Parental Involvement” workshop, “Brain Research: keeping ELLs in Mind” K-12 Literacy Conference , From Theory to Practice: English Language Learners and the Common Core Standards, Professional Development on Language workshops, etc. to keep abreast with the latest trends in ELL education and offer the best service to our ELL population at Emolior Academy. Then, The ELL Coordinator provides in house professional development to all staff (subject area teachers, secretaries, parent coordinator, etc) stages of second language acquisition and learning and metacognitive strategies to differentiate instruction for ELLs. Chancellor’s P.D dates and our Mondays Common planning are going to be utilized for this purpose. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Bilingual Guidance Counselor (Ms. Cruz) and ELL Teacher (Mr. Osei) work together to provide orientation to ELL scholars and families for High School Admission by attending supervised High School Fairs, translating for parents, and facilitating the requirement process for our ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school. The Bilingual Guidance Counselor speaks to parents as a group and individually in reference to what would be some suitable long term choices for them and some ideas on how to assist their children as they become English proficient. Ms. Cruz, the Bilingual Guidance Counselor has a bilingual extension and is currently the liaison between Emolior Academy and the NYU High School Admission research study. In accordance to the collective bargain agreement, professional development is scheduled weekly on Mondays. A minimum of fifteen percent of these P.D sessions will be devoted to specifically address the needs of English Language Learners. Professional development and training will be mostly facilitated in house by Mr. Osei, ELL Teacher for all staff. 4  Training is focused on language acquisition strategies to develop language, ENL methodologies, and differentiated instruction for ELL students. Every session has an agenda, an attendance sheet and an evaluation form. Hand-outs will be provided and power point presentations are encouraged. The ELL Teacher will keep all the forms in the ELL Professional Development binder. Additionally, Mr. Osei, ELL Teacher, will attend a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional development hours to focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. Records are kept in the ELL Professional Development binder. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? All Content area teachers have scheduled a 40- minute period weekly in accordance with collective bargaining agreements to reach out to parents of ELLs to discuss their child's language development progress and needs. Interpretation and translation services are provided by our in house staff or requested to Mr. Osei, ELL Teacher. These meetings are beyond the mandated parent orientation meeting and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conference. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parent Coordinator notify parents of relevant school, CBO and city-wide workshops and events by email or fliers home. The information is given in English and Spanish. Parents and families of ELLs are invited and involved in many celebrations and events such as our Day of Thanks, College workshops, College visits, Open houses, Poetry Slam and other events. We continue to plan varied parent events that cater to the needs of the parents and families of our ELL population. In every event, we provide Spanish translation services Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Michael Abbey, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Emolior Academy School DBN: 12X383 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Michael Abbey Title Principal Denise Loimon Assistant Principal Sheila Owens Parent Coordinator Lord Yeboah Osei ENL/Bilingual Teacher Marlen Bennett Parent Natasha Vazquez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Miosotis Cruz School Counselor Jacqueline Rosado Karyna Tejeda Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X383 School Name: Emolior Academy Superintendent: Jacqueline Rosa The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Miosotis Cruz Guidance Counselor N Y * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data used to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs was taken from the Demographics and Accountability section of our Comprehensive Educational Plan, the initial screening process, which includes completing the Home Language Identification Surveys (HLIS), and the RLAT (Report of Students Eligible for the NYSESLAT). We assess translation needs through ATS home language surveys and through our own polling measures such as parent surveys, parent communications and identified language systems utilized/ needed school-wide. Additionally we utilize parent teacher conferences and large school gatherings as opportunities to gather parent written and oral needs for future communication. All of these opportunities to collect data are discussed in correlation to Emolior Academy cabinet, teacher and parent meetings to ensure proper systems are put into place for maximum communication effectiveness. All written correspondence, including entitlement, continued entitlement and non-entitlement letters, to our ELL parents is in both English and Spanish. At all parent meetings we have staff members available who provide translation services for our parents. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Parents' preferred languages for both written and oral communication at Emolior Academy are: Spanish, Arabic, Bengali, French and English. Mharic (ETHIOPIAN) Arabic Engali (Bangla) Bambara Dagomba French Fulani Mandinka (Mandingo) English Spanish Soninke Urdu 25% 20% 40% over 40% 1 10 3 1 2 13 2 1 283 130 1 4 0.22 2.22 0.67 0.22 0.44 2.88 0.44 0.22 62.75 28.82 0.22 0.89 1 9 3 1 2 13 2 1 282 131 2 4 0.22 2 0.67 0.22 0.44 2.88 0.44 0.22 62.53 29.05 0.44 0.89 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Include Families procedures to ensure timely provision of Emolior Academy disseminates every year the following documents that requires translation: September translated documents to parents.  Our school utilizes our bilingual school secretary and office staff, office of translation, and my bi-lingual guidance counselor. 9   Emolior Academy Scholar Handbook  We translate our documents in   several ways. Smaller documents are translated into Spanish, Arabic and French. Longer documents like scholar handbook etc... are sent out to DOE translation services company for translation purposes. In case parent/guardian have questions about documents about in low incident languages, a designated staff member will contact them with the over the phone translation line and assist them explaining the written document. 6 th , 7 th , and 8 th grade welcome packets and parent guides September Parent-teacher conference announcements 4 times a year Entitlement letters and placement letters for ELLs, September High school admission workshop announcement October After-school program information September Saturday Academy information November Letters from the principal Monthly Calendar and newsletters (events) Monthly New York States testing dates and information Quarterly see above see above see above see above see above see above see above see above see above 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide The formal face-to-face meetings at Emolior Academy are the Open School Night. September interpretation service(s)?  We utilize bi-lingual staff members and NYC DOE translation office services.  Our Bilingual Guidance Counselor oversees the provision of 0  interpretation services in Spanish for LEP parents. IEP meetings throughout the year Weekly The four mandated parent-teacher conference according to the DOE calendar ENL Parents meet and greet High School Articulation Night Family events Regents Prep Tutoring Saturday Academy Graduation Requirements Four time a year from September to June October October Monthly September November January NYSESLATS testing information session April see above see above see above see above see above see above see above see above see above 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Utilize staff and office of translation Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Provide pd on A-663 in September Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Emolior Academy has in place near the primary entrance to the school on their way to the main office a Welcome Poster in each of the covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. Also, Mr. Osei, ELL Teacher has given the Language ID Guide to the school safety officer at the security desk on the first floor and a Language ID Guide to the pupil accounting secretary in the main office on the 3 rd floor. During Parent-Teacher conferences, parent orientation meetings, and Open School nights will be given a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and 1  Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. Also, copies will be placed at the main office entrance. Emolior Academy will identify all dates and anticipated document translation needs at least 30 days in advance to ensure timely and proper translation to service all student / family needs. Emolior Academy will also utilize a calendar of all scheduled meetings to ensure that translation is available and all anticipated concerns / needs addressed. “Important Notice for Parents Regarding Language Assistance Services” is posted in the Emolior Academy office in order for parents to be advised and assisted by the school of how to avail themselves of services provided by the school and the Translations and Interpretations Unit. Notices are translated into Spanish in order to ensure that parents fully understand the school’s emergency procedures, if such a situation arises. Every attempt will be made to provide parents with translations and interpretations in parents preferred language of communication.Title I Translation and Interpretation monies are used to pay faculty and staff overtime so that there is always someone at the school to communicate with parents in their native language. Our school's safety plan will contain procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access services are not prevented from reaching the school's administrative office because of language barriers.Teachers will receive per session to translate written or interpret oral communication. School Aides will receive overtime to translate written or interpret oral communication. Having someone in the building before, during or after school for translation and interpretation services is essential. The Parent Coordinator is always available to assist parents and provide them with the resources that they may need. She is also available to acquire translation support from the Translation and Interpretation Unit at the Department Of Education. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will collect feedback from parents through a parent survey at different times of the year. The survey will be distributed by the ELL Teacher in the school with the assistance of the Parent Coordinator and the Bilingual Guidance Counselor in order to gather data on the quality and availability of services. Data will be analyzed and recommendations will be shared with the school principal and the school staff. 2 
