2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 10X397 School Name: ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT PREPARATORY ACADEMY (ELLIS) Principal: NORMA VEGA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information ELLIS Preparatory Academy 10x397 321000011397 9-12 School Number (DBN): 99 Terrace View Avenue Bronx NY 10463 7182201889 7182208658 Phone Number: Norma A Vega Fax: Nvega12@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Norma A. Vega Elizabeth Levy Jorge Expedito Anel Tineo Elizabeth Reynoso AmeerahZeeba Alexander Reyes none District Information Kathy Pelles Superintendent: 335 Adams Street Room 508 Brooklyn NY 11201 kpelles@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-923-5181 Phone Number: 718-923-5145 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn, NY aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-5941 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Norma A. Vega Elizabeth Levy Jorge Expedito Ethis Tineo Elizabeth Reynoso Amirah Zeba Yoseli Morales Crystal Reyes Dora Marin Vanessa Sequiera *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Member/ teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? ELLIS strives to meet the diverse academic and socio-emotional needs of its students and their families, developing their intellectual, cultural, and collaborative abilities so that they may be active members of an interdependent world. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. ELLIS Preparatory Academy is a progressive public high school in the Bronx, New York. The school was founded in 2008 to offer a high-quality high school education to 16 to 21-year-old newly arrived immigrant English language learners, including a majority with interrupted or otherwise limited formal educations. Graduates earn a New York State Regents Diploma (see below under Internationals Network), and in addition to coursework, students also participate in internships for at least four semesters while at ELLIS. As an extended-year school, ELLIS’ year lasts from September through July. ELLIS is a member of The Internationals Network for Public Schools. Starting with the International High School at LaGuardia, the network now includes over a dozen public high schools in New York City and California whose holistic, personal approach to serving recent immigrants and emphasis on portfolio-based performance assessment has proven successful in graduating English language learners at significantly higher rates than New York City-wide averages. Starting with the Class of 2015, as per the New York State Board of Regents, graduation requirements for a Regents Diploma at ELLIS and other Internationals Network schools include satisfactory scores on Mathematics and English exams as well as a series of performance-based assessment tasks that are presented in the form of “Capstone” Graduation Portfolios. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our Students ELLIS serves a linguistically and culturally diverse population from across the Bronx and northern Manhattan, nearly all coming to ELLIS within weeks or months of first setting foot on U.S. soil. Our students come from over 20 countries and speak more than 10 different languages. English is the second – or third or fourth – language of every ELLIS student. Students have a wide array of prior educational experiences, ranging from 0 to 12 years of formal schooling. While there is no “typical” admit, the average student, upon enrollment, has previously attended school part-time for 10 years, has no functional English skills, and possesses academic skills in need of considerable acceleration, many years behind his/her age cohort in the US. Students who enroll at ELLIS (1) have less than one year living in the United States, (2) are not yet proficient in English, and (3) are over-age (15.5 to 19 years old) for entering a New York City high school. While many students enter with a high school transcript from their native countries, ELLIS understands that students need at least 3-4 years to build their academic language proficiency in English, as well as their habits of mind and work across all subject areas, in order to be ready for entry and success at an American university. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  College attendance and completion are clearly articulated as the goal for our students, as supported by targeted college access and success counseling. Among our graduates to date, over 90% are enrolled in college or will be enrolling by fall 2015. The majority of all graduates earned college credits while at ELLIS and currently attend 4-year colleges, mostly as members of opportunity programs (e.g. HEOP, EOP). 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Schools Strengths, Accomplishments and challenges: We have been successful in building a strong community of educators that deeply believe in the potential of our students. Our structures are such that they support both teachers and students. Class sizes are human size and students are with the same teachers for 2 years allowing for both students and teachers to know each other well. Our goal has been to cause students who no one wants to be successful. We have an extremely challenging population since they do not articulate from the 8 th grade and come at varying levels of education most of which is insufficient. Our students our older and come with the problems of adults and arrive to our country to meet with estranged parents for the very first time or leave their parents to live with family that is foreign to them. The level of emotional support is unprecedented and as a result of becoming a transfer school we were able to hire two more counselors thus having a counselor on every team. We have been successful in exposing all of our students to colleges through trips tailored to their interest and academic performance and because of this careful planning our graduates have remained in college and we have an 87percent retention rate. Furthermore we have built numerous partnerships through our extensive internship program which further exposes our students to the real world of work and broadens their experience so they can more accurately determine their interest and career path. Again, because of our transfer school status the funding supported us providing stipends to many students for attending their internships. The funding also supported our, SUNY Potsdam and project lead the way programs where two of our teachers agreed to include us in their, college in high school program, where our teachers will work collaboratively with their professor to design a college ready course for Potsdam credit. In addition the funding has provided us with the opportunity to further expose our students to another country and we will commence this year with a yearly trip to China where they will spend their time in a Chinese High School. Though we have made forward moving strides in increasing our retention rate we have become a focus school specifically around graduation rate, and ELA and Math scores for 2014-2015. For school year 2017-2018 our goal is 50 percent graduation rate by August 2018. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X397 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 350 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 4 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 89.7% % Reduced Lunch 82.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 73.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 4.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 10.25 0% 26% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 23% 1% 21.2% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups - Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A NO N/A N/A No N/A 1 1 77.2% 3.7% 0.6% 17.7% 2.9% 1.4% 0 37% 7.5 N/A N/A 38% 1% 27.6% 3% N/A No Yes N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  Economically Disadvantaged NO ALL STUDENTS NO 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x x x x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. A collaborative approach is used across teaching and administrative teams to build an inclusive and motivating curriculum that is culturally relevant and engaging. Targeted college visits and college access activities in grades 10-12, coupled with targeted, data-driven 1-on-1 college access counseling with support from Youth Leaders for College Access help students to formulate and reach rigorous goals of college preparation and success. In response to needs made explicit in the 2016 quality Review, specifically around our formative in classroom assessments, professional development and staff meetings this year, across disciplines, are focusing on building students’ higher-order thinking skills, and teachers’ ability to assess student comprehension, which supports the more complex tasks that students are assigned to demonstrate mastery of language and content, and in preparation for the new Capstone graduation portfolios. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  A new unit planning document has been adopted to further support this work and transparency and collaboration between teachers in instructional and disciplinary teams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Our transfer high school graduation rate will increase to 53% by June 2019 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Engage students with CCLS designed units which include regular opportunities for students to read, write, and present to a variety of audiences and implement research-based strategies that facilitate active student engagement and discussion around complex text 12 th grade students September 2018-June 2019 Admin, teachers and coaches 12th grade Sept.2018-June 2019 College counselor Peer to peer college counseling focuses students on the goal of attending and succeeding in a college. Through our partnership with CARA A peer counselor (Youth Leader for College Access) and other student interns are supporting teachers with outreach to parents (and with translation, since very few of the parents speak and read English). Most teachers (who are also advisors as part of the school’s distributed counseling model) also now spend weekly time reaching out to parents. All done with the goal of increasing graduation through setting their path to college As a transfer school with newly arrived students we need to proviide time in the schedule to support credit accumulation as well as enrichment for students who need additional support. in doing so students have a stronger chance at graduating. We have assigned a “FLEX” period five times per week to provide additional places for students to earn art/gym credits, as well as provide support to students who need additional academic support Students under-credited in core class areas as well as gym/art. Entire 2018-19 year Admin, teachers, coaches All 10 th -12 th grade students. Entire 2018-19 year and building into next year College Counselor, Social Worker, English teachers and Admin Implementation of College Access: Research and Action (CARA) vetted College Inquiry college and career curriculum to help students in constructing high-level goals for their futures. Supplemented by enrichment opportunities including Project Lead the Way (recognized by Change the Equation as the nation’s leading developer and provider of supplemental STEM curricula) and dual-enrollment courses through Syracuse University and (soon) through a new partnership with SUNY Potsdam, the institution that has done the most to help our graduates to become successful students at a respected 4-year college. This work will further be supplemented by the GPS to College Committee’s work in terms of disseminating college access curriculum as well as providing instructional support 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  around its implementation. College trips will be planned to support College Access Curriculum. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We sign parents up for accounts on Jupiter grades so they have access to their child's progress. We also have 2 parent open houses a year where they come and visit classes and see what their children are learning. In addition we hold 3 parent conferences a year a month before the trimester ends in order to inform them of their child's progress and to enlist them in supporting their child and us in helping their child to be successful Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage all human resources defined as existing school personnel and financial resources available to meet our goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. !2th Graders will have passed and completed 3 capstones by January 2018. To acquire proficiiency to present a Capstone also known as "Graduation Worthy Portfolio" students need to achieve at least a competent on their rubrics which are aligned to the cclss. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Graduation Portfolios Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ELLIS Preparatory Academy accepts a very unique student population: 100% OTC students, recently arrived immigrants, overage and under-credited, this year we accepted 15 students from other transfer schools and currently have 20 mothers along with a 30% population of SIFE students. Depending upon students’ countries of origin, features of U.S. education may be completely new. For our Dominican students (a strong majority), the six-hour school day demands increased stamina. For students coming from Koranic schools in West Africa, the study of linear and non-linear mathematics and science breaks new ground. For students from Yemen and Bangladesh, reading and writing complex texts in a new alphabet system is a daunting task. The collaborative work at ELLIS begins with identifying the specific needs of our diverse learners. We meet students where they are and move them to where they need to be, rapidly. As many of our students enter the school at 16 or older, we push them to finish high school and go directly to college. Our 2016-2017 Quality Review cited "curricula used meet the needs of students leading to English proficiency and college and career readiness."” as an area of celebration for our school. The QR went on to describe our curriculum as "aligned horizontally and vertically , spiral up in difficulty, are aligned to CCLS and reflect the instructional shifts, as evidenced by the school's comprehensive ELA scope and sequence document...unit and lesson plans are crafted utilizing a uniform template across all grades, content areas, and classes and incorporate a progression of sequenced , scaffolded 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  skills. We will be building on this feedback in 2017-2018 and focusing on formative and summative assessments. We want to focus on what students really know and their ability to articulate what they know in order to adjust curriculum in a timely manner. This feedback along with prior QR feedback from 2014-2015 which highlighted our " Advisory structure as a pillar of trust and respect at ELLIS" Continued to encourage and confirm the importance of having a strong instructional program and strong socio-emotional structures. Asthe needs of our population have increased with higher number of parents, students with unstable housing, undocumented students and students who have wider gaps in their education we have hired additional counseling staff to equal 6 and 4 instructional coaches by discipline to provide very targeted sand timely support to teachers. We strive to provide wrap around support academically and emotionally. We have a dedicated staff of teachers who avail themselves to students before after school and on Saturdays. Teacher are also advisors who are with their students for two years and ensure attendance, solid academic performance, and support socio-emotional needs. There are two instructional teams at ELLIS, each with its own dedicated counselor or Social Worker team of three. As a school, we boast a high ratio of counselors to students, indicative of our commitment to supporting students’ transitions to the United States, and eventually, to college. During the 2015-2016 school year, ELLIS, along with the other schools in The Internationals Network for Public Schools, is continuing their implementation of the graduation-worthy Capstone projects in place of Science and Social Studies Regents exams and to supplement the English and Math Regents. Virtually none of our students have written a research paper before. Leveraging our school’s strength at providing collaborative approaches to safety, learning, and community, we plan to build upon our mentorship structure and incorporate mentoring into the school day. To support students in the writing and research of major papers in all academic subjects plus one in their native language, ELLIS has developedstructures and protocols for faculty-staff mentorship. Students and mentors will communicate through weekly face-to-face meetings as well as digitally, using Google Drive. Teachers will engage in Professional Development to ensure their efficacy as mentors. Parents and guardians will have multiple opportunities to learn more about the process throughout the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2018 75% 0f our seniors would have completed all required graduation portfolios which we call "Capstones" as a result of our mentoring structure. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Weekly meetings between students and faculty mentors. Communication between faculty mentors and student mentees via Google Classroom made possible by increased technology in the form of chromebooks. Facilitating easier, efficient, time bound feedback. Comments and suggestions will be posted on Capstone drafts weekly by faculty mentors. Students will respond during class work time and out-of-class by implementing suggestions of following up with questions and edits. Professional Development for teachers regarding the development of graduation-worthy assignments that meet the demands of the Internationals Network for Public Schools (INPS) rubric. Our school has sent two faculty representatives to monthly INPS meetings to participate in the formulation of those rubrics. Parent meetings to transmit information about the graduation-worthy Capstones to parents and guardians of ELLIS students. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) nov 2017-june 2018 Students and Faculty Junior and Senior students as well as faculty from all disciplines. ELLIS faculty, Students nov 2017-june 2018 Students, faculty mentors. ELLIS faculty, INPS nov 2017-june 2018 INPS, discipline coaches, ELLIS Administration. Parents and guardians of students nov 2017-june 2018 Assistant Principals, counselors, and teachers in collaboration How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. A year long schedule of activities created by collaboratively with the parent coordinator, counselors and administration employs to educate parents on adolescent issues, transitioning to a new country etc. In addition we have to international celebrations a year where parents are encouraged to participate in their organization. As well as a community dance where parents, students, relatives come to enjoy a meal and music together. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage all human resources defined as existing school personnel and financial resources available to meet our goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January2018 75% of our seniors and 50% of our Juniors would have completed 2 of their Graduation Worthy Portfolios (Capstones) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Graduation Portfolios Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. x 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. - As an ELL waiver school, we are transitioning to a new graduation requirements as per the ELL Regents waiver. Consequently, students will need to complete a graduation worthy portfolio project to comply with NYS graduation requirements. As per the Quality Review, the school has been tasked with “improving the level of teacher team meetings to ensure that teachers consistently engage in inquiry-based collaborations to reflect on student work, improve instruction, and develop leadership skills to improve student achievement.”’ The coordinating council which is the governing body of the school - As stated in our last Quality Review in 2015-2016, “the school uses a collaborative approach to create a safe learning community where there is mutual respect and an inclusive culture” that ultimately leads to school improvement efforts. As such, we will leverage our already existing collaborative structures to improve student performance on the graduation-worthy portfolio. Existing collaborative structures include: collaborative teacher teams that plan curriculum within disciplines, coordinating council, inter-disciplinary teams, portfolio committee, scheduling committee, guidance team, guidance/admin meetings and a coaching team. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By November 2018 all 12th graders will meet with their mentors twice and will know whether they are on track for presenting their capstone in January or not. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Collaboratively developing school-wide systems and structures, ranging from implementing a distributed mentoring system that supports students towards successful completion of graduation worthy portfolio project as well as an ELL waiver Portfolio August 2017-June 2018 A cornerstone of our democratic decision-making processes is the regularized meeting times created within the schedule to allow for team building at all levels- teachers, guidance, administration. Further, structured reflection within professional development sessions serve to inform next steps as a learning community. This year, Ellis will be creating teacher committees to address the various needs of the school (eg teaching and learning committee, Graduation Worthy-portfolio/Capstone , GPS to College Committee) Regular community and team building activities allow faculty and staff to get to know each other both as individuals and professionals. Teachers regularly meet to use graduation rubrics developed by International Network for Public Schools to align curricular units. In teacher teams (disciplinary and inter-disciplinary) teachers will develop curriculum that infuses language integration strategies, in keeping with the INPS principles, as well as use a GraduationWorthy Portfolio checklist to ensure progress towards scaffolding for language development of ELLs. Teachers will meet to align rubrics across on years and disciplines are coherently aligned over a four-year sequence in all disciplines. Common access to Jupiter Grades by parents and staff will strengthen both the collaborative inquiry process while strengthening the home-school partnership. Regular teacher collaborative work will allow for the surfacing of student strengths and needs and information to be shared with parents. This is an outcome of prior collaborative inquiry work, and as supported by research, strong collaborative partnerships among teachers are further strengthened with the participation of parents and families. Parent outreach programs and workshops to support student achievement towards completion of Graduation Worthy Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers, Administration, Mentors, Student- mentees Faculty, staff, guidance counselors, administration August 2017-June 2018 September 2017-June 2018 Team leaders, administration, teachers, mentors, discipline coaches, mentors Team leaders, administration, teachers, mentors, discipline coaches, mentors Faculty, staff, guidance counselors, administration September 2017-June 2018 Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Administration, Advisors Faculty, staff, guidance counselors, administration September 2017-June 2018 Teachers, Guidance Counselors, Administration, Advisors 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25  Portfolio Project including Curriculum Night, Parent workshops offered during morning, evening and weekend sessions. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. In collaboration with Counselors and teachers parents are up for accounts on Jupiter grades so they have access to their child's progress. We also have 2 parent open houses a year where they come and visit classes and see what their children are learning. In addition we hold 3 parent conferences a year a month before the trimester ends in order to inform them of their child's progress and to enlist them in supporting their child and us in helping their child to be successful Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage all human resources defined as existing school personnel and financial resources available to meet our goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The ability to complete graduation portfolios is a strong indication of our students ability to be on track for graduation. the following are the benchmarks for students. Likewise reflecting on the projects that were created in order to refine them for the curent students and the upcoming class is important in order to design curriculum that is aligned with CCLS and is engaging. ● Fourth-year students will present science and social studies Graduation Worthy Portfolio Project in June. In February, all students who need to re-do their portfolios will re-represent. By June 2018, 90% of fourth-year students will have successfully completed Science and Social Studies portfolios. By June 2018, 90% of fourth-year students will have successfully completed Science and Social Studies portfolios. * Staff will participate in end of semester, data driven reflection/analysis/evaluation, to inform revision of systems and structures for the Spring semester. This will also occur in our respective teams and departments. This structured reflection will inform the May round of Graduation Worthy Portfolio project presentations for Math and English. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  Graduation Portfolios Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. What we need to work on: As an ELL waiver school who has been entrusted with graduating students by portfolio in addition to math and English regents we are working diligently to design more complex and challenging text that will allow a student to present a graduation worthy portfolio. In our QR in 2014-205 our “ Instruction across classrooms was often teacher centered with most dialogue being teacher-student-teacher resulting in limited opportunities for student-to-student discussions and accountable talk.” in 2015-2016 year we designed our PD around designing more complex task and how to scaffold for more complex text, vocabulary and concepts. We observe teachers regularly and were transparent in what is expected of them: students at all levels are to be actively engage in a task that lends itself to them making meaning of the task, constructing their own knowledge, ultimately they are to be facilitating discussion, questioning eachother and building upon eachothers responses. in 2016-2017 we showed progress in our instruction where it became a highlight to celebrate in our QR. Nonetheless we need to focus this year on how to support teachers in designing formative and summative assessments that allow them to know how students are understanding the curriculum and gives them opportunity to adjust curriculum in a timely manner. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  Our Strengths Based upon the quality review we have created an environment where high expectations are communicated across grades and disciplines has been developed. Teachers align curriculum and unit plans to CCLS. Teacher teams meet regularly for common planning and unit plans are submitted for review and approval by the school’s administration. In addition, administrators conduct frequent observations to provide actionable feedback and next steps to promote accountability. Teachers also participate in peer observations, norming sessions, and professional development using the Danielson rubric, resulting in improved teacher practice and accountability towards meeting expectations. School leaders and staff consistently communicate high expectations to students that are connected to a path for college and careers immediately upon entering the school, students, and parents participate in an orientation around school. In their freshman year, students are exposed to colleges through trips and conversations around college opportunities. Exposure continues into sophomore year and in their junior year students and parents receives one-on-one counseling through advisors concerning the college process. Additionally, students participate in enrichment and college readiness opportunities through college now courses and summer institutes. Moreover, on-site university courses are offered to seniors through the SUNY Potsdam program (Potsdam) and Syracuse University Project Advance (SUPA). Targeted college access counseling is also provided to all seniors and their parents with strategic support in completing the college admissions and enrollment process. As a result, parents and students have a better understanding about the college process and student progress towards those expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, school leaders including teacher leaders will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teachers’ capacity to use questioning and discussion techniques and embed intentional content based checks for understanding strategies for English Language Learners (ELLs), resulting in a 5% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in Danielson component 3b Questioning and Discussion Techniques in Advance. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Teachers and administrators will collaboratively develop a professional development plan during their weekly Teaching and learning committee embedded in the needs of the teachers and aligned with the instructional goals of the school Teachers regularly meet to use graduation rubrics developed by International Network for Public Schools to align curricular units. In teacher teams (disciplinary and inter-disciplinary) teachers will develop curriculum that infuses language integration strategies, in keeping with the INPS principles, as well as use a Graduation Worthy Portfolio checklist to ensure progress towards scaffolding for language development of ELLs. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) teachers, sept 2017-june 2018 teachers, administrators and discipline coaches teachers, sept 2017-june 2018 teachers, administrators and discipline coaches Observe teachers regularly and provide timely, accurate feedback that supports our instructional goal of designing student centered complex tasks teachers, sept 2017-june 2018 Meet with team leaders bi-weekly to ensure clear and consistent communication across teams administrators and coaches sept 2017-june 2018 teachers, administrators and discipline coaches teachers, administrators and discipline coaches 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We have scheduled a year long plan of activities through the PTA that provides opportunities for parents to become involved. The SLT and the PTA are opportunities for parents to take on responsibilities at our school and to suggest as well as implement ideas that they think will better the school. An example of a parent led initiative is our bi-yearly parent open house. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage all human resources defined as existing school personnel and financial resources available to meet our goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 all teachers would have been observed twice and students ability to maintain high level peer to peer content based conversations will be evident during our third observation in March 2018 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Danielson Framework Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. x x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As a result of our parental involvement efforts in 2016-2017 we had our highest graduation rate. We will build upon our success of monthly parent activities, providing parents access to their child"s grades to include them in fund-raising activities and setting an expectation that they are to participate during portfolio presentations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By june 2018 at least 40% of the parents in each grade will attend a school sponsored activity as measured by their attendance to these events 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) We are instituting a student life and support committee where counselors, teachers, students and administrators will develop activities that will promote a healthy community/ faculty, admin, students and parents Sept 2017-June2018 Administrators, parent coordinators, Meet the teacher day will happen by-yearly in order to make parents feel even more welcomed and invite their feedback on the learning environment and curriculum Parents October 2017 and April 2018 Sept 2017- June 2018 Administrators, parent coordinators, Teacher Administrators, parent coordinators and Teachers Sept 2017-June 2018 Administrators, parent coordinators, teachers We are creating advisories that discuss community peer pressure so that it strengthens community and trust. Some of these clubs engender this goal, such as bad boy clubs, running club and a student leader club that helps us to build trust and a sense of belonging to the school. students Community Building activities including Elective Showcase twice a year, field day, Service learning day, Thanksgiving Celebration, International Festival, Family Valentine’s Dance. Each team will also attend one full day of community building at "Ramapo for Kids" in the fall and in the spring Students, families, and all Ellis stakeholders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. NA Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will leverage all human resources defined as existing school personnel and financial resources available to meet our goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018 40% of our parent body would have participated in at least two of the scheduled activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. NYC Learning Environment Survey Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Students focus on the mechanics of writing Small group instruction After school m-f and saturdays Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are new to print Students who are unable to recognize which order of operation to use in a particular function Students who need support in understanding the scientific method students who need support understanding the skills of research At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who need to develop strategies to cope with anger and depression Small group instructon small group instruction small group instruction Students focus on developing understanding of rational and irrational numbers Students will focus on understanding the scientific method since they will be doing increased lab work students will focus on learning and utilizingvarious research skills whichwill support them in developing their research papers Students will focus on developing coping mechanism for dealing with anger and depression After school m-f and saturdays after school m-f afterschoolm-f individual counseling after school m-f 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services will be provided in accordance with their needs including individual school counseling, individualized programming to support academic needs and connections to community organizations in their neighborhood to provide them with additional support. furthermore any money that is provided to school will be used to take care of their physical needs such as clothing. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Coaching -On-site discipline based instructional coaching provides best instructional practices and professional development for teachers. -discipline coaches work closely with content teams and individual teaahers to provide feedback, modeling and support around grounding curriculum in -Feedback provided to teachers using Charlotte Danielson’s Frameworks for Teaching to ensure that teachers identify and achieve professional goals throughout the year. -Mentoring provided to new teachers to support them in overall instruction, advisory activities and classroom management, Common Core literacy standards with particular consideration for the needs of English Language Learners. Professional Development: -Staff-led professional development around topics identified by teachers to strengthen practice and cohesion throughout the school including collaboration, special education protocols, differentiation, understanding the Danielson Framework for Teaching. -Guidance department workshops created to support advisory activities, the advisor’s role and classroom management 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  strategies in the classroom. -Literacy Professional Development around reading and writing pedagogical strategies led by on-site coach, specifically targeting ELL students. -Staff participates in Internationals Network for Public Schools annual Professional Development Day. Professional Learning Communities -School maintains team model where grade-level teams meet weekly for separate administrative and guidance meetings. -Staff-selected team leaders created to enhance and promote leadership skills within staff. -Teacher-led inquiry groups to examine, analyze and resolve needs of the school. - Teachers develop and present a teacher-portfolio in June. - Teacher team meetings will participate in weekly curriculum shares to support inter-disciplinary connections and higher performance of cognitively engaging tasks. Recruitment -Administration regularly reviews applicants who can serve as high-quality content teachers with a focus on ESL strategies. - School acts as mentor campus for I-Start Program and TESOL program at Columbia Teacher’s College. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development: Teachers: - Will be staff-led professional around topics identified by teachers to strengthen practice and cohesion throughout the school including collaboration, special education protocols, differentiation, understanding the Danielson Framework for Teaching. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39  - Trends identified during the observation and feedback cycle to inform the on-site, staff-led professional development. Counselors -Guidance Counselor will provide professional development to teachers to support advisory activities, the advisor’s role and classroom management strategies in the classroom. Coaches: _ Coaches will attend 2 PD sessions on effecting coaching with "inspiring Educators" - Will provide ongoing discipline based professional development to their discipline team - Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our school is an ELL waiver school so we graduate by portfolio. Through our partner the The Internationals Network for Public schools our teachers have been involved in a series of professional development on how to align curriculum and interim assessments to the “Graduation Worthy Portfolios.” As a school we are committed to develop interim assessments that meet the needs of students and accurately indicates there levels so we know how to design curriculum that best meets their needs. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 281837 19097 46542 0 39374 0 3127823 x x x NA x NA x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 3 Section 3 Section 3 NA Section 6 NA Section 3 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. ELLIS Preparatory Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. ELLIS Preparatory Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community;  2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Title I Priority and Focus Schools and the parents of students served in the Title I program must jointly agree upon the use of these additional funds to support increased parent engagement/education to enable parents to effectively support their child’s learning.  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) ELLIS Preparatory Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:    conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46   respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;    promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;   III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: At ELLIS Preparatory Academy we utilize a content-based ESL program for our recent immigrant students. Our 16 teachers and 3 discipline coaches work in the context of 2 interdisciplinary teams design and implement standards-based, interdisciplinary, project-based curricula for the students they mutually share. Teachers in all content areas infuse their curricula with ESL methodologies and strategies for language development. Instruction is in English to facilitate student immersion and, thus, development in English. Most course work in the classroom is completed in cooperative learning groups, where students are heterogeneously mixed (by ability and gender) so as to optimize opportunities for language development. As an ELL waiver school, students are required to take the math and English Common Core Regents exams in addition to 5 state-mandated graduation worthy portfolios. Within this instructional framework, the direct instructional supplemental program will provide portfolio completion support, Regents preparation and ESL/tutoring services. These will take place before the start of school, after school and during Saturday Academy. Number of students to be served in English Common Core 150 Number of students to be served in math Common Core 100 Number of Students to served in their Graduation Portfolios 88 Grade level(s) 9, 10, 11th and 12th Language(s) of instruction • English is the language of instruction; however, careful heterogeneous and flexible groupings support students in maintaining their native language while continuing their learning in the English language, which is essential to their ability to develop their academic, intellectual, and social abilities. While English is the language of instruction, students are encouraged, wherever possible to leverage their native language as a bridge to learning and producing in the English language. This might include writing in the native language and then translating, reading in the native language to build some initial content knowledge and to conduct research, using bilingual 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information dictionaries, etc. Students are also required to complete a native language portfolio for which they also receive support, as needed, after school and during Saturday Academy. Rationale for the selection of program/activities • These before-school, after school and Saturday programs were chosen because we wanted to ensure that students who were experiencing difficulties with math and English Common Core as well as their portfolios were provided with intensive individual support in order that they have the highest chance in acquiring course credits and passing their state exams and portfolios. All of our students are older ELLs and a large number, particularly in the upper grades, are living independently and work to support themselves and/or their families. Therefore, we wanted to provide a flexible and extended curricular day and week with multiple places for additional student support, especially for students who are struggling to make adequate progress toward graduation due to personal, organizational, linguistic or academic reasons. Math teachers use Carnegie and Pearson math curriculum they already implement in the classroom as well as teacher-generated instructional materials as well as targeted materials based on student level and need. Teachers also rely on New York State Regents materials. For portfolio support, the teachers use materials and rubrics developed and shared by the International Network of Public Schools to support Consortium and ELL-Waiver schools. Times per day/week • Math and English Common Core Regents Prep meets 3-4 times a week before and after school and weekly on Saturdays. • Portfolio Support meets 3-4 times a week after school and on Saturdays Program duration • Math and English Common Core September 2018-June 2019 • Portfolio Support November 2018-June 2019 Attendance is collected and filed every Saturday. During the morning and afternoon sessions, teachers will keep a file for the attendance. They submit attendance records as part of any per session activities. The parent coordinator works with the school secretary and administration to send parents monthly calendars, hold regular PTA meetings and send families messages about these programs through phone messenger system. Additionally, teachers use Jupitergrades and parent conferences to promote the programs. Every Friday the principal announces the programs, students can receive metro cards for the Saturday program and counselors send families letters if their children require these additional programs. To the best of our ability, we translate parent meetings and notifications. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: We are a transfer school that educates solely older students- ages of 16-21- that are new to America. It is imperative that our teachers receive on-going professional development specific to our student population in order for our students to be successful. Our focus is writing and reading across disciplines as a means to prepare students for high school level course credits and to complete graduation requirements. This program will support in funding literacy coaches to work alongside all our core subject teachers (English, social studies, math and science) to develop curriculum that embeds reading and writing into their curriculum. During weekly 50-minute grade-level, departmental, committee and guidance meetings and bimonthly whole-staff PD sessions: a. Our Interdisciplinary teams of teachers critique curriculum (unit plans and daily lessons) to improve instruction and design interventions; b. Interdisciplinary teams of teachers examine student work (development of understanding as well as both formative and sumative assessments) to improve instruction and design interventions; c. Interdisciplinary teams of teachers examine social-emotional progress of students to improve instruction and design interventions; d. Discipline-based groups of teachers meet several times a week during common planning time, and with a coach once a week, to design benchmarks for assessing student progress throughout the grade levels at Ellis as well as plan unit-based curricula and daily lessons together; e. School-wide professional development occurs every other week, facilitated by ESL-certified teachers and coaches, and targets points of intervention and strategies for improving the academic achievement and language development of ELLs (this year, school-wide professional development is focusing on reading, including the use of multi-layered texts and examining text complexity in core classes as well as in independent and guided reading groups, reading conferences to determine students’ reading levels and progress, and the teaching of reading comprehension strategies). In addition to these weekly and bi-weekly activities, staff develop their capacity to improve ELL academic achievement and language development through professional development such as: • Peer observations – several times a year, teachers visit one another’s classrooms to observe best practices and offer constructive criticism on improving ELL achievement; • International High Schools inter-visitations – teachers visit ELL classrooms at our sister schools to observe best practices, bringing practices and strategies back to their interdisciplinary teams at Ellis; • Internationals Network for Public Schools workshops – teachers attend summer and/or fall conferences at which they meet with their peers from our sister schools and attend workshops facilitated by ELL-certified teachers; recent topics include: layered curriculum, integrating language development and content instruction, web-based applications for the ELL classroom, incorporating Regents preparation into project-based math for ELLs, comprehensive college readiness for ELLs, ESL methodologies applied to various content-based high-level study such as Shakespeare, government/economics, and research skills, and meeting the academic and language needs of SIFE students; other workshops apply ESL methodologies to proven best practices curricula such as Reading Horizons and Facing History. • Participating in developing SIFE grant in order to implement strategies specific to our SIFE populations 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Part C: Professional Development 2. All of our incoming students are at least 16 years old and very recent immigrants; as such, the transitions that they face include: one or more years of high school in their country to a U.S. high school system (the majority of our students); little or no school to a U.S. high school system (SIFE); middle school in their country to a U.S. high school system (very few of our students); myriad cultural transitions; living with one parent in their home country to living with the other parent—and possibly stepparent—here; living with extended family in their home country to living with parent(s) here (or vice versa); living with family in their home country to living with friends or living alone in New York. Additionally, our ELLs anticipate making a transition from high school to college and/or the workplace. Structures in place to support ELLs undergoing these transitions include a school-wide advisory program and an internship program for students having completed at least one year at Ellis. Staff are supported in assisting ELLs as they make these transitions by trained guidance staff (Hedin Bernard, certified guidance counselor with bilingual extension; Janeen Padilla, certified school social worker; Wendy Frias, certified school social worker, Jackie Pena, college access counselor, and Annel Tineo, Parent Coordinator and Internship Coordinator. The guidance staff meet weekly with interdisciplinary teams of teachers to discuss the social-emotional progress of students shared by a teacher team and provide support and training in strategies and interventions to assist ELLs in their transitions. They also provide teachers with advisory curricula covering topics such as Self & Community, Personal Values, Stereotypes & Discrimination, Health, Cross-cultural Communities, Family & Relationships, and College Preparation. In addition, the guidance staff plan visits to colleges for all ELLs each year, and provide advisors with materials and activities to support their ELL students before, during, and after these trips. 3. All professional development at our school is focused on ELL training and problem solving around student progress toward graduation (completing graduation-worthy portfolios, passing Regents, meeting the demands of a high school level curriculum) which requires student ability in reading and writing skills. Since the majority of our students (and all of our newly admitted students) are ELLs, he professional development program described in #1 above provides multi-year, on-going professional development for all members of the faculty according to the mandates of Jose P. The bi-weekly whole-school professional development on ESL methodologies, facilitated by ESL-certified teachers and coaches, combined with participation in an Internationals Network for Public Schools workshop ensures that each Ellis staff member participates in at least 25 hours of Jose P.-mandated ELL professional development. The professional development systems and structures of the school support teachers to better support students in the before-school, after school and Saturday programs as they are both focused on targeted instructional support to accelerate language development, portfolio completion and improved scores on state exams. 4. All teacher meeting agendas, minutes and attendance are recorded in google documents created for the purpose for this purpose. 5. While these regular PD meetings are embedded in the schedule, our teachers are in dire need out-of school time to participate in extended professional development and planning outside of the school day. This would mean additional costs for the school. The PD providers are: Jennifer Moore (AP)- English and Special Ed 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Part C: Professional Development Pamela Gordon (coach)- English International Network for Public Schools Stefanie Macaluso (coach)- Science and Language Development Wendy Frias- Social Worker Hedin Bernard-Guidance Counselor Janeen Padilla-Guidance Counselor Jackie Pena-Social Worker Jeremy Heyman- Science and ESL Vanessa Sequeira (AP) - Social Studies Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The majority of our students are ELLs (and all newly enrolled students are ELLs). Parental involvement at Ellis is difficult for several reasons: Many families fall below the federal poverty level, so parents often work two or more jobs; parents themselves experience difficulty making cultural transitions to a U.S. school system and are unaccustomed to being involved in their child’s school; as our entire ELL population is 16-21 years old, a great number of them live with siblings or other more distant relatives or friends who do not acknowledge a responsibility to support our students academically, and many of our students live independently and/or are caretakers themselves- of siblings or their own children. Nevertheless, parent involvement at Ellis has been steadily increasing. At a recent PTA meeting, nearly 25% of our ELL students had family representation, an increase from an average of 5-10% PTA involvement in the previous year. Workshop topics planned for future PTA meetings, held monthly, include Using Jupitergrades; Speaking to Your Adolescent; and Financial Aid for College. Parent conferences (Open School Night and Open School Afternoon, held three times per year) typically have a much better turnout, with an average of 60-75% of parents coming to speak with their child’s advisor and/or teachers about their child’s progress. At a recent series of parent college orientation meetings, the college counselor met with parents of over 75% of students applying to college this year. A few parents are regularly involved in volunteering at Ellis, supporting the Parent Coordinator and other staff, and several parents provide translation and interpretation services during monthly PTA meetings. Ellis Preparatory Academy partners with Institute for Student Achievement and Internationals Network for Public Schools, both of which provide support and professional development for teachers and guidance staff in meeting the needs of parents and families. In addition, the International Rescue Committee (IRC) provides valuable parent, family, and student support in the way of legal, financial, employment, housing, and cultural transition services and/or workshops, primarily to our families from South Asia and Africa. Every year, we hold a curriculum night which allows parents to learn about the school's curriculum and program. We 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities also hold an open classroom day which invites parents to come in and visit their children's classes during the day. Additionally, we have begun a parent college orientation day in order to better prepare parents for the college application process. Finally, we will organize parent sessions, specifically around promotion-in-doubt, PSAT/SAT nuts and bolts, the portfolio process, international celebration/festival and college workshops, important curricular events (e.g. state exams, portfolio presentations, etc.), parent ESL classes and tours of the city. All parents will be notified via courier and letters backed packed home in the translated into the languages they speak in a timely fashion. All parents are targeted for these programs, however, the parents of students who are especially targeted for the before-school, after school and Saturday programs receive additional outreach such as phone calls, letters and meetings. Annel Tineo, Parent Coordinator, is the leading coordinator of the above events and activities, in collaboration, as needed, with teachers, guidance and administration. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name ELLIS Preparatory Academy Borough Bronx School Number 397 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Norma A. Vega Coach Helen Corcoran ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jeremy Heyman Teacher/Subject Area Zack Hartzman Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent type here Assistant Principal Vanessa Sequiera Coach type here School Counselor Hedin Bernard Parent type here Parent Coordinator Anel Tineo Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] D. Student Demographics 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) Total number of ELLs ELLs as share of total student population (%) % Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 00 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? PIn addition to the administration of the LAB-R to all newly enrolled ELLs at Ellis to determine their English literacy level, we also administer the first of our Design-Your-Own periodic writing assessments (along with other schools in partnership with the Institute for Student Achievement) within the first two weeks of school. We also administer a native language reading assessment to our Spanish- and French-speaking students (many of our West African students speak and read French as a second language). Analysis of these early literacy assessments show that: A majority of our students are literate in their first language; approximately 25% have low literacy in their first language (either because of interrupted education in the case of SIFE or because of a poor quality of education in their home countries); incoming students’ English literacy ranges from pre- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58 literate to emerging literate levels, with a small handful entering with beginning or intermediate English literacy levels. On the basis of these early assessments, teachers design their differentiated and multi-layered curricula, choose multi-layered texts for classroom use, program students into independent, guided, or SIFE-oriented reading groups, and assign students to heterogeneous core classes. Within classes, teachers use these assessments to form small working groups, moving students from heterogeneous to homogeneous groups as the needs of particular lessons demand. aste response to questions here: 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We are organized into 5 teams of 75-80 studentswith 4 core teachers and a counselor responisble for them. In the lower grades we loop so 1st year students reman with the same teacher 's, counselor and Adviosr for 2 years. This tight grouping of adults and students allows for the adults responsible forthem to knowthem well and understand their academic needs more deeply. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? PaWe have begun to use the MLS for our entering students. Though the baseline assessment is geared toward SLIFE students it has proven beneficial for all of our entering students in helping us group student s heterogeneously an build curriculum that builds upon their skill level. We will continue to assess our incoming students with the MLS and use the infromation from this baseline to group students and build curriculum that closely matches their skill level. ste response to question here: 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We have 4 full time discipline coaches that meet with teacher individually wekly and as a discipline weekly. In these sessions the focus is on supporting the teachers to engage students in high cognitive instruction and developing language strategies that will allow access to varying students within the class. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Paste response to question here: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The success of our program is measured through the analysis of a wide array of data sources, including: • Graduation rate above • Course pass rate for all grades • Regents pass rate • Attendance rates • Learning Environment Survey – student results • Learning Environment Survey – parent results • Learning Environment Survey – teacher results • Dropout rate • Student anecdotals Paste response to question here: 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? n addition to our 4 coaches who turnkey information to their discipline teachers we meet weekly in interdisciplinary teams where teachers analize data from across their particular groups of students and adjust where necessary the goals that were establishe for the team. We also meet as a full staff 2x a month where data is disseminated and trends are shared. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Paste r In order to identify English Language Learners (ELLs) in our school: 1. All students admitted to ELLIS are recently-arrived immigrants who have been in the country a year or less and have not been articulated from JHS. The Home Language Identification Survey is administered in order to determine the students home language to: all NYC first-time admits, students who have been out of NYS schools for 2 or more continuous years and students from a NYS school whom have not obtained previous ENL status. This includes an informal oral interview in English and in the native language of both the student and his/her parent/guardian conducted by a qualified ESL licensed pedagogue or by a teacher trained in cultural competency, language development and the needs of ENL students, licensed and trained pedagogue. Also the licensed pedagogue will be proficient in the home language of student or parent or else we will use a qualified interpreter/translator to ensure that the student or parent/guardian best understands. In order to assess that the parents clearly understand the questions during the ELL identification process and are afforded the opportunity to ask questions and express their concerns when necessary an interpreter is used either in-house or through the DOE Translations Unit. Translation services are made available during the entire ELL identification process. When required, the students are administered the NYSITELL within ten days of admission. If the student's native language is Spanish, they are also administered the Spanish LAB within 10 days of initial enrollment. The cut-off score matrix in the NYSITELL Memo is used to determine the student’s ELL entitlement status. The students’s NYSITELL/Spanish LAB answer sheets are submitted to the Borough Scanning Center for assessment. The student’s home language code is determined based on the assessment of the information collected from the parents on the HLIS in conjunction with the informal interview. A student is considered to have a home language other than English if one question on Part I of the HLIS: quesetions 1-4 and two questions on Part 1 of the HLIS questions 5-8 and the interview with parent and student indicate that the a language other than English. Newly identified ELLs will be placed into an ELL program based on parent's choice within 10 days of school enrollment. For students entering with an IEP, the school has 20 days to place the child into the ELL program chosen by the parent. The pedagogues responsible for conducting the initial screening instruments and administering the HLIS, NYSITELL and if necessary the Spanish LAB are: • For the administration of the HLIS: Edward Liu, school assistant principal works in conjunction with ESL licensed pedagogue Krissy Lawlor and Hedin Bernanrd, licensed Guidance Counselor. • The administration of the formal initial assessment in literacy, math, English (NYSITELL) is conducted by Krissy Lawlor (licensed ESL teacher). If families speak another language then we have additional pedagogues on staff who speak Spanish, Arabic and French. When staff is not available to translate, the DOE Translation Unit is utilized to assist us with the over-the- phone translations of other languages. The completed HLIS forms will be placed in the student's cumulative file and become part of the student's permanent record. aste response to questions here: aste response to questions here: esponse to questions here: b. TBE program. If applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? . Mandated Instructional minutes: As per the new CR Part 154 requirements, beginning September 2015, students will be carefully programmed to receive the mandated ENL and ELA instructional minutes based on new proficiency guidelines. Beginners/Entering students will receive a minimum of 540 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of ENL standalone, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 180 minutes of standalone or intergrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Low Intermediates/Emerging will receive 360 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 90 minutes of standalone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area.) Intermediate/Transitioning willl receive 180 ENL minutes per week (this consists of 90 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL with ELA or any other content area). Advanced/Expanding will receive 180 minutes of ENL per week (this consists of 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) Proficient/Commanding or students who are former ELL's will receive 90 minutes of ENL each week (this consists of 90 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area.) We have a series of delivery models to ensure that each student receives these mandated ESL and ELA minutes through discrete ESL classes as well as many classes taught by dual certified ESL/content area teachers. (ie: teachers who have dual certification in both ESL and a content area such as ESL/English, ESL/Social Studies and ESL/Biology certification.) Each instructional team includes at least one teacher who is licensed in ESL; in addition, all of our content area teachers are trained in language development and ESL methodologies and encouraged to pursue ESL certification. The school schedule and teacher programming ensure that all entitled ESL students receive the mandated number of minutes required according to CR Part 154. In addition to our regular content curriculum all ELL students are given extra ESL instruction in order to meet the number of minutes they require of ESL instruction each week. Paste response to questions here: Paste response to questions here: 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Paste response here: 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Paste response to 4. Ensuring that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages? At ELLIS, ELL’s are appropriately evaluated using the instuctional strategies as described in Question # 6 (a-e) below. At orientation, incoming ELL’s are given a native language assessment. At the International HS, we greatly value students' native languages. All of our interdisciplinary classes have native language components to them. We also offer college native language classes in many languages. We have a comprehensive native language performance-based assessment which all of our ELL students must complete. Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: question here: 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Paste response to q Instructional plan for SIFE Students: All students who are identified as SIFE students (Students with Interrupted/Inconsistant Formal Education) are immediately placed in our SIFE program where they receive additional support in English literacy until a level of proficiency is achieved as determined by the SIFE coordinator along with the student’s individual teachers and guidance counselors. The common denominator among these students is a weakness or inability to read or write in their native language. Teachers and guidance counselors identify students who meet this profile through an examination of report cards, educational history and student work, student parent interviews and teachers referrals. Once students are identified to enter the SIFE program, our challenge is to find ways to teach students to read and write in English and acquire content knowledge when they have limited, if any, literacy skills in any language and may also have serious affective issues as well. In order to service students who are struggling, each team has provided extra services: including one-on-one work with a literacy specialist, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period) have been made. Our SIFE model features: • An intensive Language Arts period is held during the regular core daily program to accelerate learning taught by a specially trained literacy specialist in small group settings of five to ten students in which instruction is guided by individual students’ needs. This class is focused on reading comprehension, reading fluency and vocabulary development based on high interest topics drawn from the social studies curriculum. • Scaffolding students’ work in regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the SIFE teacher and content area teachers to generalize and practice newly learned skills and strategies across a variety of settings. A team teaching approach would be used in which the SIFE teacher plans with the content areas teacher, works with SIFE students in the classroom daily to implement strategies, and also meets after class sessions with the content area teacher to discuss students’ work and review lessons and activities. • All SIFE students are expected to attend extra after school home work sessions b) Instructional Plan for Newcomer ELL Students: Newcomers to the school, along with their parents, meet initially with a guidance counselor who assesses their needs and academic development during intake. All new students and their parents receive an orientation developed by the guidance staff along with the parent coordinator. All students new to the United States and to NYC are given the NYSITELL exam which assesses the students English language abilities. For students transferring in from NYC schools, test results are reviewed and students are then matched with teams of teachers who it is felt would best meet the needs of the specific student. Students are placed in appropriate classes according to their specific needs. The teachers meet in team to discuss the specific needs of all new students. A plan is formulated to best meet the needs of each particular student. c) Instructional Plan for Developing ELL's: The plan for developing ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years consists of ongoing support and mentoring. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are placed in appropriate classes to best meet their needs and continue their English language development. Their teachers meet regularly in teams to discuss the needs fo the specific students. A plan is formulated and updated regularly to meet the needs of each student. ELLs who are receiving service for 4-6 years receive a full program and receive all the same support structures as the rest of our ELL poplulations. Struggling ELLs who are receiving 4-6 years of service are encouraged and often mandated to avail themselves of all the extra support opportunities provided to all the students at large. This help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, the Saturday literacy program as well as a variety of other activities. ELLs with 4-6 years of service are encouraged to try to take some college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. These ELLs with 4-6 years who meet regularly with their guidance counselor and teachers on their team to receive support and feedback to help assess in their language development. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  d) Instructional Plan for Long Term ELL's: The plan for long term ELLs consists of ongoing support and mentoring. Long term ELLs continue with a full program whether they are with us 5 or 6 years and retain all of the same support structures in place for the entire student population. Struggling long term ELLs are encouraged to take advantage of all extra help opportunities provided to the students at large. This extra help takes the form of one-on-one mentoring, small group instruction, after school homework help, writing center as well as a variety of other activities. Whenever possible, long-term ELLs are encouraged to begin taking college classes to help them to begin the transition towards college life. International High School long term ELLs regularly begin taking remedial college classes. All long term ELLs in college classes receive support from a high school teacher mentor. e) Instructional Plan for Former ELL's up to 2 years after exiting ELL status): As students reach proficiency and test out through the NYSESLAT assessment, they continue to receive a full program of ESL services to support and provide for their continued academic growth and development of English proficiency. Students receive higher levels of project opportunities and also have the opportunity to take college classes in any of their academic areas. Our school offers these students the opportunity to receive an Associates Degree from LaGuardia Community College along with their high school diploma as part of a five year program. Students who are determined to have reached proficiency continue to receive support from their teachers as needed. Former ELLs continue to receive the mandated testing accomodations after they they have testied out on the NYSESLAT exam. All former ELLs in college classes receive support from a high school teacher mentor. ste response to questions here: uestions here: 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? PInstructional strategies and grade level materials used to provide ELL-SWDs access to academic areas and accelerate English language development: The guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher review all IEP’s for ELL-SWD’s to ensure that all IEP mandates are being met and to ensure that the ELL-SWD student receives the appropriate program in the least restrictive environment. After reviewing the mandates of the IEP, the full team of teachers meet with the Special Education teacher to discuss specific instructional strategies that would prove valuable to the growth of the ELL-SWD student and follow the mandates of the IEP. The team along with the guidance counselor, Assistant Principal and Special Education teacher ensure that all of the mandates in the IEP are carried out. If additional support is needed the student is provided with additional support services as per the IEP. The ELL-SWD students who may have learning needs undiagnosed in their home country, have been here a short time and are only beginning to learn English, and/or have experienced serious disruptions and inadequacies in their earlier academic preparation are addressed by creating instructional opportunities geared to their needs. Students with Individualized Education Plans (IEP's) receive full support from the instructional teams to which they belong. Those students are included in mainstream classes, and receive additional services in language, counseling, and adaptive physical education. In biweekly meetings, the teachers of our instructional teams meet to review the progress of these and other students. Teams of teachers along with the guidance counselors meet regularly throughout the semester to review the progress of each student in accordance with their specific IEP. Some of the specific instructional strategies for ELLs depending on the requirements of their specific IEP’s include: Teachers, guidance counselors and special education teacher meet regularly to discuss the individual needs of the ELL-SWD student. Once students have been identified as ELL-SWD and a program has been established following the mandates of their IEP, the challenge is to find ways to teach the student the skills they require while also teaching the student to read, write and speak English and acquire content knowledge when they may have limited, if any academic skills, have specific disabilities as descreibed in their IEP and may have serious affective issues as well. In order to service the ELL-SWD student in the least restrictive environment, students are mainstreamed into the regular academic class and each team provides extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction and after school tuturing. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs are made to allow the student time to meet with 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  the necessary special service provider depending on the students specific needs. Other strateiges include scaffolding students’ work in the regular heterogeneous classes for most of the school day by developing collaboration between the special education teacher or service provider and the content area teachers. A team teaching approach would be used in which the special education teacher plans with the content area teachers to map out strategies an best practices and to access the students strengths and area which still need imporvoement. If necessary, ELL-SWD students are expected to attend extra after school home work sessions and are also enrolled in our weekly Saturday Explorers Literacy Program which servies to enhance their literacy skills through exploration of NYC and its environment. Paste response to question here: 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Paste r8. ELLIS uses a variety of curricular, instructional and scheduling flexibility to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWD’s to attain their IEP goals within the least restrictive environment. Once students are identified ELL-SWD’s our challenge is to find ways to teach students according to the mandates of their IEP’s in the least restrictive setting. The team would meet with our Special Education teacher or service provider depending on the needs of that students particular IEP in order to determine the best instructional strategies to meet the needs to that student according to their IEP. In order to service students who are struggling, each team has provided extra services: including one-on-one work with a paraprofessional, small group instruction, and after school tutoring. School-wide, a Saturday enrichment program has been established, and changes in student programs (such as an extra language arts period) have been made. By adapting curriculum to enable those students to succeed, by expanding the time available to team members to work with them individually, and by using the resources of student teachers, social work interns, they are supported in meeting the graduation certification requirements. Our plan maintains that our future students with IEP’s will receive additional academic assistance in accordance with the particular needs of their individualized IEP’s. Paste response to question here: esponse to question here: 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Paste response to question here: All of our targeted intervention program are geared towards supporting all of our ELL subgroups; teachers running these programs implement the “Internationals Approach” in all of them: • Saturday Literacy Program —classes will meet a total of 30 sessions beginning in September, through mid June, from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 P.M. 12-15 students will be served. Group size will be maintained at 6-7 students per teacher. This class will be targeted to Entering and Emerging level students only. Certified ESL teachers along with content area teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy using English acquisition through new vocabulary learning, oral practice through discussions, learning map skills (with NYC land mark and subway system), and cultural/historical exploration, and conduct interview, journal writing during and after the trip. These strategies will help students achieve higher scores on the NYSITELL. Students create a brochure “Places to go in New York City” by the end of the year. For some of the sessions, students first meet a 9 a.m. to do classroom work and go off on trips visiting various museums and land marks in NYC. In addition to 2 teachers, instructional material, general classroom supply, and snacks will be purchased to support the Saturday Academy. • Enrichment class—All 403 ELL students receive targeted intervention enrichment classes in music, art, literacy and math which meet 3 times per week for 50 minutes throughout the year during the regular school day. Group size will be maintained at 15-18 students per teacher. This class will be targeted to Entering, Emerging, Transitioning and Expanding level students. Certified ESL teachers along with content area teachers will provide supplemental instruction in alignment with the New York City and New York State content and performance standards. Instruction will focus on developing skills in both English and Math Literacy work on students portfolio projects and oral presentations. • SIFE ENL Literacy class---specially addresses instruction in second language acquisition to improve literacy 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  performance through new vocabulary learning, pronunciation, read-out loud, oral practice through conversation and discussion, and sentence structure. Two classes, each consisting of 10 students and meeting for 50 sessions in total, meet 4 times a week for 60 minutes each, from late September to early June. This class will target Entering and Emerging level students to help them improve on the NYSITELL. Instructional material, general classroom supplies and snacks will be purchased to support this class. • Year Book---This class will improve literacy skill and performance of 15-20 Transitioning and Expanding level students through English language development through hands-on, activity-based sessions with student discussion, writing text & captions, and designing layouts and proofing and editing all written work. Thus, students’ English language development is enhanced. Students will meet 30 sessions, once a week for 60 minutes from late September to early June. Student will publish annual school year book in spring and produce digital year book at the end of the year. Software, General supply, snack will be purchased to support this class. • Student Community Involvement—ELL students have opportunities to do community service, research projects, and leadership training. This will culminate in their understanding of social issues that pertain to immigrant populations and thus enhance cultural awareness, social learning and a positive adjustment to American society. Over the past few years our students and staff have worked with a variety of outside community based organizations such as Advocacy Lab, Facing History and Ourselves, Sanctuary for Families, The AAFE-Asian Americans for Equality, Go Green Western Queens, Recycle a bike, Child Center of NY-WIA Program and Sunnyside Community Services among others. Currently 25 ELL students are participating in an internship/career readiness program with The Child Center of NY-WIA Program. Over the past years participants in these programs identified, planned and implemented projects covering themes such as: 1) preventing bias, sexism and racism through dialogue facilitation, 2) Helping tenants know their rights regarding housing issues, 3) Preserving our water and keeping it clean, 4) Providing Resources to increase literacy in your Native Language, 5) Young Immigrants and Access to Financial Aid, 6) How to handle depression and eating disorders. Our staff will be trained by the two organizations. Several of our teachers will spend forty hours in total in support of partnership work with community organizations. These are all supplemental activities which will aid our students in acquiring English through a variety of community involvement activities. This targeted intervention targets students in all content areas but gives special emphasis to the content area of Social Studies. Before/After School Tutoring-content area teachers in Social Studies, the students native language, English, Math and Science. Content area teachers in Social Studies, English, Math and Science provide support to students in all sub-groups in small group settings for one to two hours per week. Although all students may avail themselves of Before/After School tutoring the main ELL sub-gropus which are targeted are the SIFE studetns, Newcomers and ELL-SWD students. This not only includes students who are having difficulties with their class work but also provides assistance for students who are working on their 10th grade and Senior Graduation portfolio projects which include their social studies research paper, native language project, math project, science project, English literary essay, creative project as well as their mastery statement. These classes are taught by licensed pedagogues in the content area. Native language support is provided to students in all of the above mentioned intervention programs through the use of paraprofessionals, bilingual pedagogues, student peer and college mentors who share a common native language. In addition, bilingual dictionaires and multi-lingual computer software are utilized as well. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have partenered with SUNY Potsdam where our students will be taking potsdam courses at our school for Potsdam Credit. Additionally we will be offering Syracuse University Courses at our school and students like the Potsdam course will be able to acquire college credit. We will also take students again to China and those students who attend will be a part of a History course on China the first and second semester in preparation for the trip. They will spend time at a high school with other highschool students in China expanding their view of the world while writing a research paper regarding China as a world power and its impact on the western society particular to education Paste response to question here: response to question here: 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  Paste response to question here: 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. POur entire school are ELL students and all programs designed with them and for them. Since the majority of our students work after school since they are older we have designed our schedule to include afterschool in theor program so our day on mon, tues and thurs ends at 4. Afterschool activities will include cultural clubs, sierra running club, boys and girls groups, guitar and tutoring. Additionally we will hav Saturday Academy for students who need additonal support. Paste response to question here: aste response to question here: 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. is the philosophy of the school that classroom teachers are the most knowledgeable as to what instructional supplies will benefit the ELL students from all ELL sub-groups in their content area classes. Teachers work in teams to order classroom supplies for the ELL students they have in common. The teachers in consultation with the colleagues on their team as well as in consultation with the schools SIFE teacher and guidance counselors which classroom supplies would be most beneficial to the students in all of the schools sub-groups. Each teacher team selects the instructional material they feel will work best for the needs of their individual students. This helps to best meet the needs of all of our students in the individual sub-groups within our school, Newcomers, SIFE, ELL’s 4-6 years, long term ELLs as well as former ELLs. Each team shares equally in the school’s NYSTL funds and chooses for itself how they wish to spend the schools their allotment of funds to best serve their individual students in all of their content area classes. Teachers and students in all ELL-subgroups have access to a huge array of novels, textbooks, non-fiction, bilingual dictionaries as well as native language books. All of the materials are available to all ELL sub-groups. Teachers are encouraged to attend ENL conferences to share information regarding various texts as well as other teaching aids and in addition our teachers work collaboratively to create their own instructional materials. Teachers utilize computer software, maps, the Internet as well as various other forms of technology which helps to maximize instruction in all content areas and within all sub-groups. Teachers in all content area have access to class sets of laptop computers with Internet access as well as two fully equipped computer labs. Teachers are having students use power point projectors to share the results of group projects or individual research. Smart carts with laptops are bringing technology into the classroom and extending the number of computers available to students outside the computer labs. Various nonprofit Internet organizations that provide feedback for students are helping students to revise and edit their work as well as suggesting additional resources. Additionally, teachers have made use of library book funds provided by the school to create mobile classroom libraries with books that are more accessible and more appealing to ELLs as well as all the other sub-groups of students within our school. The Teaching and Learning Committee has amassed a compendium of booklists, articles on literacy, and reading programs for reference by the instructional teams. All students including ELL students in all sub-groups, have access to a variety of technologies including a technology lab, wireless laptop computers. Students use various web based programs. Other resources available to all students and ELL sub-groups include native language texts and all students including all ELL sub-groups have access to our rather extensive native literature collection. Paste response to question here: 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? How students’ home language skills are being used for instructional purposes: All our students participate in our language development/ENL program. All of our classes use the native language to support learning. As described above, the locus of control over language use resides with our students and they use both English and their native languages to discover and develop content. Some projects every year are done in the native languages and in English and students are supported in developing their native languages to the greatest extent possible. Students are 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  supported by peers, community partners, family members and/or school personnel. Native language skills are a valued aspect of all subject area classes. Students are required to complete a Native language project as one component of their graduation portfolio. This native language project is an informational, communicative or creative piece in a language other than English, along with a written explanation of the piece in English. Paste response to question here: 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. How students’ home language skills are being used for instructional purposes: All our students participate in our language development/ENL program. All of our classes use the native language to support learning. As described above, the locus of control over language use resides with our students and they use both English and their native languages to discover and develop content. Some projects every year are done in the native languages and in English and students are supported in developing their native languages to the greatest extent possible. Students are supported by peers, community partners, family members and/or school personnel. Native language skills are a valued aspect of all subject area classes. Students are required to complete a Native language project as one component of their graduation portfolio. This native language project is an informational, communicative or creative piece in a language other than English, along with a written explanation of the piece in English. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school is unique in that we are the only all ELL transfer school on the campus, thus our student body is different from the other schools in the building. We do come together around sports provided that our students meet the age requirements. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). At the onset of the new school year students receive a tour of the school facilities and take part in ice breaker activities in an effort to become more comfortable with the high school environment. During that orientation new students are assessed as to their English language and Math abilities. New students are assigned to heterogeneous teams (or clusters) with, as far as practicable, students who speak their native language. The new students are then paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. During this time a meeting is held with the parents of incoming ELLs to provide them with an understanding of the resources available to them at the school as well as within the community. Many similar activities take place when ELL students enroll throughout the school year. When a new student enrolls they meet with their guidance counselor and, along with the assistance of a translator, receive a one on one orientation to the school and the community. Just as with the students who began in September, students who enroll throughout the year are paired with more experienced students who are responsible for escorting them to class and lunch, making sure they know how to get home, explaining school rules and customs, and acting as their translator and advocate in class. Paste response to question here: Paste response to question here: e response to question here: 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? ELLIS awards six high school credits in the student’s native language as per Part 100 of Commissioner’s Regulations NYS, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  Section 100.5. which is based on students previous language experience in their native country plus the completion of a native language project as a part of their graduation portfolio. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development Plan: To achieve our instructional goals and implement our core beliefs an extensive structure of professional development has been developed. This professional development structure is on-going and fully integrated into our school structure. The principal repository of professional development has been the instructional teams in the school. Our entire school is divided into five team learning communities. The three Junior Institute 9th and 10th grade teams are each comprised of four teachers and approximately eighty students. The two senior institute 11th and 12th grade teams are comprised of 7-8 teachers and approximately 130 students. The teachers meet twice weekly to plan, develop and implement their curriculum and instruction. Teams typically interview and hire their team members, and meet at the beginning of the year to help each other develop goals. They develop and revise curriculum and model collaborative work for their students. Teachers also meet in cross-team groups to share student work and curriculum. They are also sharing strategies for maintaining project-based curriculum with meeting the demands of the Regents exams. All members of the ELLIS faculty serve on one of the four school-wide committees, Teaching and Learning, Personnel, Student Life, and Support Services. The first two committees mentioned are charged with the implementation of different aspects of the school-wide instructional approach to further assist teachers with the implementation of our curriculum. The Student Life Committee allows for open lines of communication between students and staff and empowers students to become a partner in planning their educational opportunities. The Support Services Committee works to support students, to ensure that their affective needs are being met so that they may fully participate in the instructional program. The faculty run committees plan and coordinate staff development day activities, which focus on improving instruction. Faculty meetings have also had workshops in the areas of crisis management run by our counselors from Support Services. ELL techniques, literacy and native language Instruction workshops were also led by staff members. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  Minimum ELL Training for all staff: All of our teaching staff, which includes teachers who do not hold ESL or Bilingual licenses, are provided with a series of professional opportunities at ELLIS. The professional development program focuses on providing teachers with various instructional strategies for teaching English Language Learners. It also focuses on how to prepare ELLs to meet and exceed the NYC and NYS performance and learning Standards. These professional development sessions are facilitated by fellow faculty members and school administrators. 1. Two 2-hour session on supporting SIFE and IEP students to access a rigorous curriculum (Planned for: September 8, 2015) 2. One 1-hour session on Academic language for ELL students: (Planned for: October 6, 2015) • Introduction on language development and our students • Sharing unit maps on teams and coming up with interdisciplinary academic language that the team can focus on together with ELL students. 3. Two-2 hour sessions on Language and Content Integration for ELLs: (Planned for: Nov. 3, 2015) • Various language and content integration workshops led by the Internationals Network for Public Schools 4. One 1-hour session using SMART board to build entry point for all ELL students (Planned for November 24, 2015) 5. Two-2 hour session on Language and Content Integration for ELLs: (Planned for February 1, 2016) • Strategies in the classroom integrating language and content • Strategies: -The Language Experience Approach -Vanishing Cloze -Joint Sentence Construction 5. One 1- hour session: Native language Use in the Classroom (Planned for March 1, 2016) • How to incorporate native language and use it as a support for students in the classroom 6. One 1- hour session: Let’s Give ‘Em Something to Talk About: Language and Content Integration: (Planned for April 5, 2017) • Social and Academic language sentence matching • Barrier crossword • Word matching (Nominalization) • Cause and Effect Sentence Combining In addition, our staff participates in the Internationals Network for Public Schools Professional Development workshops: at three different points throughout the year our entire staff will meet with their peers from our sister International High Schools and attend workshops designed specifically for educators of recent immigrant ELL students. Topics will include scaffolding instruction, differentiation of instruction, ENL methodologies, SIFE students, meeting the affective needs of immigrant children, and language development. Other members of our non-teaching staff also attend staff development training. Our school secretaries and parent coordinator take part in many of the above mentioned staff development activities along with teachers. In addition, our secretaries attend an all day staff development for secretaries on Election day and our Parent Coordinator attends the mandatory two day Respect for all Anti-Harassment Initiative to prevent bullying and bias related incidents. Since all of our staff participates in the above-mentioned professional development opportunities throughout the school year, plus many more staff members avail themselves of the professional development opportunities listed in part 2 above, everyone receives many more hours than the current 50% mandated total for bi-lingual/ESL teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We will hold annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs at least one time during each school year, in addition to the four regular parent teacher conferences. At these meetings teachers will discuss the goals of the program, the language development process of the individual student, the language proficiaency assessment resluts as well as the student's language development needs in all content areas. At this meeting we will have content area teachers, the student counselor, and a school staff member to translate as needed. If no staff member is able to translate than we will utilize the DOE Translation Unit to hold over the phone translations. ELLIS has teachers working collaboratively on five interdisciplinary teams. Each of the teams meet together to discuss students' language development and content knowledge progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs during their weekly two hour meeting. Each interdisciplinary team has 40 minutes of their weekly team time to utilize for parent involvement time. This period of time which is within the teacher's contractual day is specifically set aside for meetings with parents of ELL's. Each team is assigned a guidance counselor or social worker in order to place phone calls to parents to schedule meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELLIS provides all parents including ELL parents/guardians with the opportunity to attend a variety of literacy, math, and homework workshops, so that they can better assist in the education and learning or their children at home. Due to the work of our parent coordinator, during the 2016-2017 school year parents of our students were invited to register for free Parent ESL classes held at ELLIS for parents wanting to learn English. This year we are hoping to to continue with this opportunity for our parents. Parent Workshops---A series of 2-hour workshops will be held on different topics of interest to our parents. Each year our PTA assembles of list of suggested topics and the school does its utmost to accommodate these workshop requests. This year some possible topics and projected dates based on parent feedback include: • One 2-hour session on how parents can help their children to succeed in high school and introducing parents to the International HS instructional model. (Planned for September 2017). • One 2-hour session on the College Application process and how to deal with financial aid forms and college financial aid bureaucracy. (Planned for October, 2017). One 1-hour sessions to: a) Title I Annual Parent Meeting; (Planned for November 2017). • Two 2-hour session on the communication and relationship between parents and their teens. (Planned: December, 2015) • One 2-hour sessions on how parents can use Jupiter grades as a tool to keep up with how their child is doing in school. (Planned for: February, 2018). • One 2-hour session on protecting you against job and housing discrimination and your rights presented by one of our CBO’s, Sanctuary for Families, an immigrants rights organization that helps immigrants in the community. (Planned for March, 2016) • One 2-hour session on how to support students with issues of cultural adjustment and second language learning. (Planned for April 2018). • One 2-hour session on awareness of gangs and how to keep your child safe and warning signs of bullying. (Planned for May, 2018) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Want to reiterate that we are an all ELL , All over the counter acceptance transfer school of students who are 16-21. We have an average for admit age of 17.5. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Norma Vega, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: ELLIS School DBN: 10x397 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Norma A. Vega Title Principal Vanessa Sequeira Assistant Principal Anel Tineo Parent Coordinator Jeremy Heyman ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Helen Corcoran Coach Coach Hedin Bernanrd School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x397 School Name: ELLIS Preparatory Academy Superintendent: Kathy Pelles The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon acceptance into Ellis Preparatory Academy, each student is interviewed orally and in writing about his/her first language as well as the language with which the parents are most comfortable. This information is recorded in each student’s emergency card, on ATS, and on an in-house master spreadsheet of Ellis students. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74 Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish French Bangla Arabic Urdu Albanian 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Yearly/Monthly Calendar Trip Permission Forms Parent conference Reminders Supplies List Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 4 parent conferences 2 meet the teacher days/nights 2 international festivals 2 Fundraising fairs 1 college day/night Monthly PTA meetings 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76  ELLIS Preparatory HIgh School will provide timely translation and distribution of communications by utilizing the DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit, using allocated funds for translation/interpretation, utilizing previously translated documents available on the DOE website, utilizing School Messenger, which translates and sends automated messages to parents, and using the DOE's Translation & Interpretation Unit at 718-752-7373, ext. 4 for over-the-phone translations, as necessary. Parents will be provided with a Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities in their native languages so that they are aware of their rights regarding translation and interpretation services. An interpretation services sign is also posted near the entrance to the school to alert parents to how to access interpretation services. The school safety plan includes a stipulation for using our multi-lingual staff members as translators for communicating with parents. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Use of the parent survey, along wth monthly check-ins after PTA meetings with parents eliciting from them if there are any other supports than already provided that we can provide and what additional support do they need. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77 
