2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X405 School Name: HERBERT H. LEHMAN HIGH SCHOOL. Principal: JOHN POWERS 2018-19 RSCEP-ON 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Career and Technical Education (CTE) Programs (for high schools) Section 10: Professional Development Plan Section 11: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 12: Title I Program Information Section 13: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Herbert H Lehman High School 08X405 320800011405 School Number (DBN): 9 – 12 3000 East Tremont Avenue Bronx, New York 10461 (718) 904-4200 Phone Number: (718) 904-4235 Fax: John Powers jpowers5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: East Side House John Powers Stephanie Edwards TBD Lisa Casucci-Mateo TBD TBD TBD TBD District Information CarronStaple Superintendent: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx NY, 10468 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 935-3074 Phone Number: 718-904-4235 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-8895 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. The RSCEP will also enable Renewal Schools that were designated as “Out of Time” Priority Schools during the 2014-15 school year to respond to additional state-mandated requirements, including: providing students access to Career and Technical Education (CTE) program offerings at schools in Good Standing beginning in the 2018-19 school year; and, mandatory professional development for school leadership and staff. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 6  The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 7  In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 8  on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional SLT exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit the school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update the school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT), Community School, Career and Technical Education Program (CTE), and Professional Development Plan sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group John Powers Garrett Pfisterer ElletteSimmsSeraphin Lisa CasucciMateo Stephanie Edwards AminataGadji Jenna Mateo Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 10  Check if SLT X X X X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MartineMcGregor Victoria Selsky Tatjana Lazray Susan Pedretti Stephen Kane Chris Lynch Parent Member/ Member/ Parent Parent UFT Staff UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) John Powers Stephanie Edwards Garrett Pfisterer Stephen Kane Susan Pedretti Principal CSD UFTChapter Leader UFT UFT 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 11  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ElletteSimmsSeraphin MartineMcGregor Lisa CasucciMateo Tatjana Lazray Chris Lynch Zach Lynn N/A N/A N/A N/A PA PA PA PA UFT CSA N/A N/A N/A N/A 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. Lehman High School occupies the first floor of the Lehman Educational Campus. Over the past several years, we experienced a decline in enrollment as more schools were co-located into our building, but we have reached a steady footprint at about 800 students, and our student projection increased for September 2018, for the first time in five years. We are a community school, and serve a diverse and largely minority student body, most of whom reside in the local area. Therefore, Lehman is in a position to provide a range of services to students and families to ensure their success. These opportunities range from an on-site medical clinic staffed by a local hospital to opportunities for overage and under-credited students to enroll in our Young Adult Borough Center or other unique grant-funded programs designed to promote credit accumulation. For students who need additional academic challenges, we offer a partnership with College Now at Lehman College and on-site courses for SUNY credit, from University at Albany. To strengthen our Honors program, we are also entering a partnership with Johns Hopkins to allow access to their online courses for credit. Our key strategic collaboration is with East Side House, our CBO, which arranges a number of services for our students, from mental health referrals to internships. We believe that all students can learn if given the proper support, differentiation, and encouragement. All students are engaged with Common Core-aligned learning tasks appropriate to their current level. Regardless of the particular academic content, however, students will encounter a common academic vocabulary and common lesson structure across disciplines. All lessons will have Aims and Objectives and lesson framing displayed at the front of the room, pivotal questions, and opportunities for student engage critical reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills. We encourage the use of metacognitive tools (or "Thinking About Thinking") as a unifying framework across disciplines. Many of our students are minorities. Approximately 80% of students meet federal poverty guidelines for free lunch. Of those who plan to continue to college, many will be the first in their family to attend. This population presents unique challenges that require targeted support in SPED and ENL, and also need assistance navigating obstacles to academic success. For example, a CBO runs a "FAFSA day" for college-bound students and their families, who are unlikely to have the resources or knowledge to fill out the forms on their own. Given our student population, we have begun to emphasize work arund Culturally Responsive Teaching, and expect to introudce that to teachers of the course of the year. We have made the most progress over the past year in the "Collaborative Teachers" element of the Framework for Great Schools. Over the past year, we have implemented common planning time during the school day for academic departments as part of our renewal model. Teachers are engaged in inter-visitation through Peer Collaborative Teachers.. We are still improving in the "rigorous instruction" category. Additionally, teachers are still in the process 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 13  of aligning their instruction to the Danielson Framework for Teaching, a process that is ongoing and for which teachers are receiving frequent professional development from the Office of Renewal Schools. We chose Renewal Model 1, such that ELT opportunities are integrated into our nine-period day. This has proven to be a programming challenge, but does allow for students to maximize their credit-earning opportunities. Nearly all ELT programs are credit-bearing. Over-credited seniors can opt for a "Supervised Study" ELT, which embeds assistance from our two college counselors around college applications. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 14  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X405 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 732 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 336 331 23 16 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 127 114 5 1 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 76.0% % Reduced Lunch 13.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.0% 48.9% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 10.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.13 1% 6% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 67% 61% 56.0% 10.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A YSH YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES YES NO YES No N/A 249 231 1 8 85.6% 4.6% 24.2% 23.5% 15.3% 1.8% 10 12% 10.4 N/A N/A 69% 60% 57.9% 9% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YSH YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A NO YES 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed x Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Lehman High School has made a concerted push over the past two years to improve instruction, which has resulted in increased Regents pass rates, and a 19-percentage point increase in 4-year graduation rate over the past three years. While our metrics are not yet as high as we would like, they reflect improvement such that we have met most of our state receivership benchmarks and have a consistently high demonstrable improvement index. As part of our efforts to improve teaching and learning, we have emphasized both data-driven instructional planning and inquiry, and also the use of classroom routines and rituals that will improve student voice and engagement and also prioritize student tracking of progress and ownership of learning. Teachers are likely to use a number of discipline-specific metacognitive tools, and are also likely to engage in seminars or similar student-driven accountable talk activities designed to have students co-create meaning with their teachers. Given the whole-school nature of these improvement efforts, and how they touch all departments, the overall graduation rate should increase. As we have not met our Renewal or Receivership graduation rate benchmarks, and the data reflects a trend whereby graduation rate is lower than expectations, raising the graduation rate is a worthwhile goal. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 16  What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? Our instructional focus is "To design coherent lessons and assessments that are rigorous and student-centered and that cultivate literacy skills and engage students to think critically across content areas.". Furthermore, we will assess those skills throughout lessons and units so that we can differentiate instruction effectively. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally? We strive to meet the needs of diverse learners through the use of a variety of sources, applications, and instructional materials and methods that will appeal to specific subgroups of learners. Rigorous instruction of CCLS-aligned curricula that includes differentiation and the use of multiple entry points will serve to meet the academic, social, and cultural needs of diverse learners. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision? We are partnering with our CBO to ensure career and college readiness. The CCLS instructional shifts will help ensure that students have the academic background to develop these skills, habits, and behaviors. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success? We will deliver instruction based on the learning styles and needs of our students. We will enhance that delivery through the use of technology, including smart projectors, smart boards, and laptops, purchased in part with money from the Community School Grant. How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? Teachers will be given professional learning introducing them to different strategies for use. What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes? Assessment will be built into lessons to drive instruction. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) Regents Exams summative PSATs formative Midterm Exams benchmark Classroom Exams formative and summative 9-12 9-11 9-12 9-12 assessment drive instruction drive instruction drive instruction Part 3 – Annual Goal 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 17  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the Upper Level Math inquiry team will collectively analyze student work and formative and summative assessments in order to improve student problem solving skills as measured by a 5 percentage point (from 64% to 69%) increase in students passing the Common Core Geometry Regents. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? 4-Year Graduation Rate (Geometry is a +1), Remaining Regents Completion Rate 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 18  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Advance reports, average rating on component 3d, by evaluator and by department. Examination of Inquiry minutes and lesson plans, MP Passing Rates (at teacher and course levels). Advance reports and aggregate observation data for Math Department Instructional Cabinet AP Math, Upper Level Math Inquiry Team September, and then ongoing for different PLCs. Ongoing, Period 5 Tues (Common Planning), Wed (Inquiry) Progress to Graduation Ongoing, Principal, AP Math during weekly AP check-ins Grad Rate, Remaining Regents Exams Once per week Selected Math Teachers, AP, SICs/BILs Lesson Plan artifacts. Teachers will receive PL in use of assessment in instruction Teachers Grad Rate, Remaining Regents Exams Teachers Grad Rate, Remaining Regents Exams Math teachers will engage in Inquiry Work using a LASW protocol, and will tie the insights generated during Inquiry meetings to refining curriculum planning during Common Planning Time. The principal will work with the AP to develop strategies designed to develop student ownership of work in mathematics. FSC Coach will engage Geometry teachers in a process of structured data gathering and analysis, reflection, and instructional modification separate from the Inquiry team. This will focus particularly on ensuring alignment of lessons to high-Principal, AP Teachers, Coaches, AP 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 19  leverage Regents skills. SIC will be a part of the Geometry Common Planning team, to support the gathering and analysis of data to support those teachers in maximizing the value of the Inquiry Team experience. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will leverage our PA, Parent Coordinator, and CBO. Additionally, there is outreach and parent meetings required of receivership schools. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. The resources that we will leverage in order to achieve this annual goal, and to implement this action plan, include utilizing common planning time, contractual time before and after school, professional development, lead teachers, coaches, and the administration. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, at least 69% of students will pass the Geometry midterm exam, as a result of the instructional changes concretized by the Upper Level Mathematics Inquiry Team. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship report (STARS) and custom report 1.01, in consultation with the NV Marking Period Check-In Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and X SOP(s) Addressed sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review)? As we have worked to develop a school culture that crates the superstructure that will support academic success for a wide range of students, we have had both successes and challenges. One of our major successes has been the creation of an attendance team and the hiring of an attendance consultant, which has resulted in our meeting our Attendance Benchmark and increasing our attendance rate. We have also, however, encountered challenges around systematizing the work we do to support social-emotional growth. While East Side House, our Lead CBO, is engaged in valuable work and connects us with additional resources to support attendance and mental health, we currently lack the strong systematized protocols that we built, over the past three years, in attendance and in programming. We have therefore retained a new AP Guidance who is now building systems around student support, guidance intervention, and articulation with alternative settings. The lack of systems has manifested itself most clearly in an inability to keep first year students on track. While we excel at graduating students who remain on-track, we are less equipped as an institution to get students back on track so that they can graduate in four years, particularly in cases where a different setting might be warranted. We are in the midst of developing, therefore, a suite of programs that will help ensure that first-year students will earn ten credits in year one. While some of that issue has been addressed programmaticly (students take four credits in English, four Math, and three Science during the first year), there is also intervention required to ensure that students are able to maximize those opportunities. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 21  What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? A supportive school environment requires a comprehensive and coordinated effort by all members of the school community. It involves enveloping students in a suite of wraparound services and looking at the whole child to identify barriers to success and plan a coherent and integrated sequence of interventions, supports, and services. Our CBO acts as supportive counselors and role models and serve as a conduit for students to access services and receive support. Additionally, we will focus for the year on community building among faculty and between faculty and students. Building a caring community is a prerequisite for engaging in culturally relevant pedagogy. Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner CBO Focus East Side House Social and Emotional Health How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families? East Side House is key to our plans to develop a supportive environment for students. East Side House also assists in outreach to students' families. Additionally, we will leverage other DOE consultants and resources. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. As a result of enhanced social-emotional learning and closer collaboration between the Guidance Department and CBO, the percent of students earning 10+ credits in Year 1 will increase 10 percentage points (58% to 68%) from June 2018 to June 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? PTG Cohort X 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 22  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. The Principal and AP Guidance will work together to develop and model for GCs an outcomes-driven system of protocols and interventions designed to increase student engagement in school and subsequent credit accumulation. The CBO and Guidance Department will develop affinity-based programs to help first-year students overcome obstacles to graduation (For example, female empowerment group, Aim Higher) Parent Outreach via CBO and counselors will occur after school and on weekends to support student engagement in programs Guidance Counselors and ESH will engage in success monitoring of students at risk Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Cohort X Students At Risk Progress to graduation, Year 1 Ongoing, Weekly Guidance/Attendance Meetings Guidance Counselors, AP, Attendance Coordinator Cohort X Students at Risk Progress to graduation, Year 1. Weekly AP Guidance, CSD How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Marking period grades and attendance. Attendance rates for students, and grades for enrolled students. Parents of at-risk Cohort X students Progress to graduation, Year 1, School-Community Engagement Framework Score Twice per month AP Guidance, AP Special Ed, Counselors, CSD, CBO Staff Attendance at parent events. Cohort X Students at Risk Progress to graduation Year 1 Weekly Guidance Counselors, AP Guidance, Attendance Coordinator Attendance Rate for Targeted Students 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 23  Students at risk will be invited to attend an Organizational Skills Club once weekly after school. Cohort X students at risk Progress to graduation year 1 Weekly Organizational Skills Club Adviser, COSA Club attendance. MP Grades for club atendees. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage in a number of outreach strategies to parents, including using the CBO to run parent programming in partnership with our parent coordinator. In addition to opportunities for parents to come to school, outreach will also take place via technological platforms (Skedula, K12 alerts, etc.) and via home visits by the CBO where appropriate. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use Tax Levy funding and CBO funding. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By January 2019, 68% of students will earn at least five credits. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Credit accumulation, NV Portal Credit Gaps and Attendance Heat Map SDCs. Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 24  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? We have organized better this year for collaborative work, and have arranged Common Planning Periods for all departments. However, we now need to better support teachers in using that common planning time to improve instructional outcomes. To that end, we have focused on literacy across the content areas as a unifying thread for our common planning, because an analysis of Regents data has made clear that our students struggle most on the exams that are more focused on Literacy (English, Social Studies, Living Environment). AP Exam results also follow this trend, as our two highest scoring exams historically have been AP Computer Science Principles and AP Calculus, both of which are relatively light on the content-specific reading and writing. Teacher collaboration will take place using our literacy lens to facilitate student and teacher connections across content areas in line with our instructional focus. This collaboration should boost student performance on Regents Exams, particularly since the academic vocabulary and literacy skills required are common across multiple Regents exams. As such, Regents Passing Rates (as operationalized as a single number by the Remaining Regents Completion Rate) would improve, and the Regents is an area of focus for Receivership and Renewal benchmarks, and a priority goal for the school. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching? 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 25 Our vision for collaborative teaching involves teachers engaging in classroom intervisitation, looking at student work together, and opportunities for both structured inquiry and relatively unstructured collaboration. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning? The School Instructional Cabinet will norm together to create a common set of expectations and practices, and a common vocabulary around student learning. How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Teachers will meet on a daily basis to work together, as well as to mentor and learn from one another. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? Lead teachers and course leaders will mentor other teachers through this process. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Intent IEPs To ensure lessons are appropriately scaffolded Skedula Gradebooks To ensure that teachers are regularly engaging in formative and summative assessment. Lesson Plans To ensure appropriate planning for rigorous instruction for all students Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. As a result of the professional learning planned by the PD Committee, and the collaboration encouraged by DataWise Inquiry work focused on strengthening the instructional core within the Social Studies department, the percentage of US History students who pass the US History Regents Exam in June 2019 will increase by ten percentage points over 2018, from 43% to 53% Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? Remaining Regents Completion Rate 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 26 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) US History Teachers Remaining Regents Completion Rate Ongoing, All Year AP Humanities, FSC Coaches Remaining Regents Completion Rate Ongoing AP Humanities, FSC Coaches US History Teachers and Teacher Leader US History Teachers Remaining Regents Completion Rate Ongoing, as per PD committee PD Committee, PCTs, AP Humanities How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Student artifacts and associated teacher trackers. Rolling Agendas and linked artifacts. Observations, particularly scores in Domain 3. US History Teachers Remaining Regents Completion Rate Once per month Principal, AP Humanities Observations and lesson artifacts. Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. US History Teachers will engage in interdisciplinary cross-curricular planning with the English Department to incorporate Hochman Writing Strategies in US History US History Teachers will receive PD on the DataWise Inquiry Process from FSC Coaches, including support to a teacher-leader who will co-facilitate the process US History Teachers will receive PD on questioning strategies and other research based instructional strategies from the FSC coach and administration. The principal will host a series of "lunch-and-learn" workshops to demonstrate new methods of scaffolding for multiple entry points, and then the AP will ensure such strategies are used and evaluated. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 27  There will be Spring AIS/Regents Prep offered in the Spring As part of the Data wise process, students will be interviewed and participate in regular reflections about their learning. US History Students Remaining Regents Completion Rate US History Students Remaining Regents Completion Rate Twice per week, beginning after Spring break Ongoing Principal, AP Humanities, CSD Attendance sheets. AP Humanities, FSC Coaches Rolling agendas, student artifacts 4b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent meetings will emphasize curriculum interconnections, and involve parents in a discussion of how students' class will interconnect. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. No additional budgetary resources are necessary. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. At least 53% of students will pass the US History Midyear Examination in January 2019. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Interim assessments, unit exams, and Mock Regents exam Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 28  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 X 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Given the demands of ESSA, we have arranged our resources to support meeting a 67% graduation rate, which is the threshold for avoiding a CSI/TSI designation. Such a graduation rate which also meet our renewal and receivership benchmarks. We have had some difficulty getting students back on track after they fall off track, but we are re-mobilizing all our resources around finding all students in our accountable cohort a viable path to graduation. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school? Effective school leadership requires setting a clear goal in line with the Chancellor's Citywide Instructional Expectations, and engaging in distributed leadership and professional development so that teachers drive the desired change with support from administrators. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year? The focus will be on designing systems and protocols that leave time to prioritize the supervision of teaching and learning. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 29  What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus? Ongoing professional learning and a rigorous process for the induction of new teachers will ensure this is true for the faculty. A series of community-building activities incorporating our COSA and CBO will ensure that there is buy-in from students and parents as well. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school? We will use teacher leaders to develop capacity and roll out our instructional agenda. Differentiated leadership is important due to the larger number of new teachers that require socialization into our unique school culture. How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders? We have a broad suite of outreach initiatives overseen by our CBO and Parent coordinator that foster collaborative school governance with families and other stakeholders. How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Twice Weekly, at least three teachers 24 hours fully accurate What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) IEPs Professional Learning from BFSC AP Special Education How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? We have an expert programming staff and a school business consultant, and will also rely on the suite of tools provided by New Visions for data support to ensure alignment of resources and needs. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 30  As a result of a targeted program of supplemental social/emotional support paired with online instruction for U-cohort students who are more than four credits off track, the June graduation rate will rise 14 percentage points (from 53% to 67%) from 2018 to 2019. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal? 4-Year Graduation Rate 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 31  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Increased focus on social-emotional support and attendance through individual and small-group counseling, attendance success mentoring, as well as intensive parent outreach once per marking period, and building a pipeline to transfer schools. AIS Services and Apex classes specially designed for seniors missing Regents Exams Tracking of Senior Students' class grades Develop a partnership with Lehman YABC for shared instruction, so that Cohort U students who need specific courses can take them after day school, while still receiving our after school support. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) 4-Year Grad Rate Ongoing AP Guidance, GCs Severely off-track Cohort U Students How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) % of students on-track quarterly. Cohort U students missing Regents exams or credits Cohort U students enrolled in required classes Cohort U students who need additional opportunity for credit accumulation 4-Year Grad Rate Ongoing AIS Teachers, Coordinating GC Attendance at AIS courses or activities after-school. 4-Year Grad Rate Ongoing Teachers of required senior classes Passing rates / MP Data 4-Year Grad Rate Ongoing Principal, Coordinating GC, AP Guidance Enrollment and passing rates in YABC shared instruction courses, quarterly. The Principal will model intervention Guidance Counselors 4-Year Grad Rate Once per month Principal, AP Guidance % of students on track to 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 32  and capacity-building strategies for GCs and teachers, as well as model how to guide students through the transfer school articulation process as appropriate. 4b – Parent and Family Engagement graduate, quarterly. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will engage parents and students in monitoring the progress of seniors to graduation, using a differentiated RTI approach to ensure that parents of students at greatest risk receive the greatest support Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. No additional budgetary needs exist. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant X C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, all senior students will pass all graduation-required classes. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. MP Passing rates. Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their X SOP(s) Addressed high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? As a community school, Lehman High School offers a full range of outreach activities that would fall under the heading of school-community ties. We have a range of partnerships with our CBO and with other outside agencies that have a presence in our school and provide services to students. Additionally, there is a thriving internship program, which places students in local businesses. As far as parent involvement, our Parent Coordinator is the point person for a number of efforts at outreach, which include family nights, monthly Breakfast with the Principal, Incoming family orientation, and family outreach coordinated by our Lead CBO. We noticed that, while we have a small group of committed and involved parents, many parents are not engaged outside of matters directly concerning their child. For example, PA Meeting Attendance is generally low (the PA needed to be reconstituted in Sept 2017 because of a failure to secure a quorum and hold elections), and there was a Title III event last year at which no parents showed up despite several positive RSVPs. Institutionally, this lack of widespread engagement is reflected in a low parent survey response rate (12% last year). The low response rate, and the presumably non-representative sample that results from such a low response rate, makes it hard to engage in strategic planning with parents in mind, and hard to brainstorm ways in which parents might become more engaged through changes in school strategies, events, and outreach. As such, raising parent response on the survey is a prerequisite to 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 34  improving relationships with parents as it will allow us to gather better information to make, presumably, better strategic plans. Additionally, a more engaged parent body should be reflected in increased student grades and attendance. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school? As a community school, strong family and community ties are essential to keeping students in school and to raising academic achievement. We will also leverage our ties to the community in order to improve our recruitment efforts and message our rebranding. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? There is a dedicated Family Welcome Center (open during the school day) and our Academic Outreach Lab (available to parents at night for instruction in computers). Our Parent Coordinator ensures a welcoming environment for parents, and all parents who sign in are initially directed to her office so that parents can most efficiently spend their time at Lehman. The Parent Coordinator will also have discretion to direct the use of resources for parent outreach as appropriate. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures? The Parent Coordinator has worked with the reconstituted Parent Association to identify and encourage families with the capacity to take a leadership role in school governance. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught? The school will have multiple opportunities for parents to meet with teachers, and will debrief with teachers to determine what valuable information was obtained about students. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale Parent Outreach via CBO To encourage parent participation How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Dedicated Parent Welcome Center. Outreach through the Guidance 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 35  Family partnerships with CBO: Yes, families with partner with East Side House to support student success. ESHruns a series of outreach events and parent events, and also assigns advisers to students at risk. Those adivsersare a point of parent contact as well. Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? Yes, East Side House has an office, and the CSDhas a separate interior private office What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? Parent coordinator and CBO will conduct skills-based workshops and classes. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success? Parents will be able to access PupilPath at school. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. As a result of better collaboration between the school and CBO partners in parent outreach, parent response rate on the School Survey in 2018-2019 will be ten percentage points higher than the 2017-18 response rate, an increase from 22% to 32% Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve School Survey-related benchmarks 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 36  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Parent coordinator will engage in outreach (in person, mailing, electronic, and phone calls) and in school events where parents can fill out surveys at school Principal and school staff will emphasize survey response at monthly Principal's Parent Outreach events Parent programs and outreach will take place on Saturdays in conjunction with AIS and Saturday School, designed to improve parent engagement. Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Parents Survey-related Parent coordinator After receipt of survey login forms How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Ongoing monitoring of response rate. Parents Survey-related Monthly Principal, CSD, Parent Coordinator Ongoing monitoring of response rate. Parents Survey-related Monthly Principal, CSD, Parent Coordinator Ongoing, monitoring of response rate. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. No reallocation of resources is required. This goal can be accomplished by staff during their normal workday. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG or SIF Grant 21st Century School Success Grant X C4E Other 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 37  Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By Feb 2019, 100% of parents will receive outreach via phone and mail regarding the upcoming Parent Survey. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. % of parents who have received confirmed outreach (measured by Skedula/io Messenger, In-person visits, or CBO or GC phone contact. Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 38  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. The ELT program will allow opportunities for students to earn additional credits, prepare for college via seminars and study halls, engage in guidance or advisory supports, or participate in service-learning internship projects. As ELT is integrated into the school day via renewal model 3, it is impossible to disaggregate the effects of ELT from the effects of the school's program more generally. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. As our ELT is integrated into the school day (per our selected renewal model), we will monitor attendance and participation in ELT using the same protocols that are employed to monitor attendance and participation in other classes. Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 39   Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation? In the Fall Semester, most students are using ELT to take an additional academic (credit-bearing) class. Some students are engaged in Internships. In the Spring, students who are on-track will be given the option to participate in an advisory class and/or SAT Prep and/or College Readiness training. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. Since we chose Model 3, ELT will be supervised by those same individuals who supervise the rest of the school day. Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Sept - June Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. With the exception of dedicated funding, no additional resources are needed. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. X 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG or SIF Grant P/F Set-aside School Success Grant C4E Other Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 40  As ELT is integrated in the school day, progress monitoring will be subsumed into other CEP goals. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instrument of measure is indicated in other goals. Part 6c. In February 2018, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 41  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, Lehman High School will sustain and expand the Community School Program to provide students and families with social, emotional, and academic supports resulting in: ● a 3.00 rating in Framework: Strong Family-Community Ties ● a minimum student attendance rate of 85% Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? List of Renewal Benchmarks expected to improve Student Attendance Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership East Side House Target Population Scope of Service Outreach Chronically Absent Students Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community 2. 3. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 42  4. School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. All stakeholders at LHS are committed to the continued improvement and the success of our students academically, socially and emotionally. Lehman High School has partnered with East Side House Settlement as our primary CBO partner. East Side House has become an integral member of our school community. Their staff of ten social workers, in concert with our guidance counselors, have taken critical steps toward transforming the culture of LHS. To date, these have included: ● using RISA data to identify students with 70% - 89% attendance rate and intervening with home visits, student attendance contracts, incentives, and most importantly through individual and group counseling. We have begun to see significant improvement in attendance and school culture. LHS teachers and guidance counselors report that this collaboration has provided them with greater resources and strategies to address students needs. Furthermore, students have reported feeling supported by the counselors on this team. ● collaborating during our Extended Learning Time to compliment our academic offerings with high-interest classes that draw students based on interests and needs. ● partnering with LHS to reward student achievement and exceptional effort through incentives and awards ceremonies. ● developing service-learning, managerial and entrepreneurial internships in our school and broader community to increase students’ motivation to engage in learning in multiple contexts. ● creating Student Empowerment Groups to address questions of race, culture, gender identity and sexuality. ● providing outreach to parents and supporting them by referring them to services as needed Community School Directors – A Community School Director has been hired to coordinate and support the implementation of the Community School model. The CSDs are experienced youth development professional with a minimum of five years of experience; hold at minimum a bachelor’s degree (and preferably a Master’s degree). The Community School Directors will be responsible for overseeing the provision of supportive services at the school and ensuring extensive and meaningful community and parental engagement. The Coordinator will be a highly visible presence in the school and community and will develop favorable rapport with parents, CBO leaders, members of the local Community Board and business owners while functioning as a catalyst, connector and trusted colleague to many. The Coordinator will play a lead role in the following: ● Successful implementation of a Community School Team (CST) that will be established. The Team will meet monthly to continually assess progress and put in place measures to ensure ongoing improvement. The CST will also be responsible for annually developing a Community School Plan that puts forth strategies, goals, policies and budgetary allocations for the following year. ● Increased parent engagement ● Increased student attendance ● Increased student participation in ELT and enrichment activities 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 43  ● Increased utilization for mental health services and improved mental health, and the degree to which students achieve progress toward identified goals ● Increased school resources (raising additional funds, increasing number of volunteers) Personalized Student Needs The CET and SLT will be instrumental in the design of community schools activities and services. East Side House onsite staff (community school director, student advisors, social worker) will become an integral part of the school community, gaining first-hand, on-site knowledge about the Lehman High School students. From this knowledge, and from working closely with Lehman High School teaching and support staff (i.e. guidance counselors, student support teacher and assistant, classroom teachers), it will become possible to offer instructional, enrichment and mental health services that are personalized to student’s needs. Extended Learning Time – East Side House will partner with the school to provide instruction and enrichment during Expanded Learning Time. In addition, they will bring in other partnerships to provide students with a myriad of ELT offerings in areas such as the Arts. Mental health programming - East Side House will provide mental health services through onsite social services providers (i.e. social workers). East Side House will either provide needed services directly, or will access needed mental health support services from other agencies through a case management model. The school-based East Side House mental health staff will work closely with the already existing student support staff/services at the schools (i.e. guidance counselors, Montefiore Health Clinic) and the 21 st Century Leadership Program student support activities. Parent Engagement – To ensure increased parent engagement at the school, East Side House will offer opportunities for families to engage in special events throughout the year, and will be an integral partner in the school, working closely with school administration, parents, teachers and the Lehman High School parent coordinator. The exact nature of the parent activities will be collaboratively determined by the CST based on perceived needs. Given the difficulties that are part of the lives of many parents at Lehman High School, activities will include specialized support for families, arts and athletics services for parents, services for parents focusing on English language skill development and employment. Activities will be provided by East Side House staff, or by partners recruited by East Side House. Weekly Meetings - Meetings will be held with the community schools partner to review implementation of ELT program and daytime program, activities of partner staff. School data (e.g. OORS reports, parent engagement, New Visions Attendance Heat Map) will be used to assess success of program and to inform future activities. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Program oversight will be provided through several structures: ● The Community School Directors, who work on-site at the school, will have primary responsibility for overseeing East Side House activities. He/she will work closely with the principal, staff, CST members and parents to coordinate activities resulting in an enhancement of services for students and families. The Directors will be responsible for implementing, monitoring and tracking all services, will assess effectiveness of services, will establish processes and 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 44  procedures for launching and providing ongoing monitoring of services provided under the auspices of East Side House. ● Social Emotional Umbrella Committee that will develop the vision and design of the partnership will continue to meet during the partnership on a monthly basis. The committee, made up of teachers, parents, and East Side House and Lehman High School staff will provide a second oversight regarding how “things are going” and if services are meeting needs as envisioned. Our Attendance consultant works with New Visions and the NV Sorter Strategic Data Facilitator to inform determine which students are at risk, and target students for intervention, and create groups of students to receive intervention. Our Guidance Department does the same, for different interventions. Therefore, we can ensure that the right interventions get to the right sutdents. Program Assessment – These school-developed tools will not only provide evaluation information, but will include a section for suggestions/additional needs/next steps so that services provided continue to meet perceived needs. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program. The following resources are needed to build a successful partnership that will meet the needs of the Lehman High School community: ● On-site mental health worker(s) who can provide direct services, and/or referral services from other agencies on a case management basis. The mental health worker(s) will also oversee delivery of services, measure student and family progress, and make mid-year adjustments as indicated. ● Tutors, teachers, instructors who will provide Extended Learning Time opportunities. ● East Side House staff, working closely with the Lehman High School Parent Coordinator to plan and implement family events (e.g. performances, field days, health fairs). ● The East Side House Social Worker will work with school guidance counselors to provide student and family supports. ● The principal and assistant principals will organize and guide the collaboration between partner and school support staff. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Planning of activities and services has already begun. During the summer, the Social-Emotional Umbrella Committee will be established and will begin meeting. Direct services and activities will continue to be provided throughout the summer into September with the opening of school and will continue throughout the school year. A CET, a subgroup of the SLT will meet regularly. The CET includes school staff, partner staff, and parents. The Team will meet from September - June. Renewal activities will run from September 2016 - June 2017. The ELT program began on the first day of school. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 45  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Review of credit accumulation on student transcript, report cards, Attendance rates Mathematics Review of credit accumulation on student transcript, report cards, Attendance rates Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Extended Learning Time Saturday Academy Lunch time PM School Extended Learning Time Saturday Academy Lunch time PM School PM courses for credit recoup Direct small group instructions for Credit Recovery Regents preparation courses East Side House Student Advisor to provide small group and/or one to one counseling, as well as support from A List tutoring consultants Blended learning PM courses for credit Recoup Regents preparation courses East Side House Student Advisor to provide small group and/or one to one counseling Blended learning Regents Preparation Classes One-to-one AIS Tutoring Tutoring during Extended Learning Time Small group or one to one counseling to address attendance concerns Direct small group instructions for Credit Recovery Regents Preparation Classes One-to-one AIS Tutoring Tutoring during Extended Learning Time Small group or one to one counseling to 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 46  Science Review of credit accumulation on student transcript, report cards, Attendance rates Social Studies Review of credit accumulation on student transcript, report cards, Attendance rates PM courses for credit recoup Regents preparation courses East Side House Student Advisor to provide small group and/or one to one counseling Blended learning PM courses for credit recovery Regents preparation courses East Side House Student Advisor to provide small group and/or one to one counseling Blended learning address attendance concerns Direct small group instructions for Credit Recovery Regents Preparation Classes One-to-one AIS Tutoring Tutoring during Extended Learning Time Small group or one to one counseling to address attendance concerns Direct small group instructions for Credit Recovery Regents Preparation Classes One-to-one AIS Tutoring Tutoring during Extended Learning Time Small group or one to one counseling to address attendance concerns 1:1 or small group setting Extended Learning Time Saturday Academy Lunch time PM School Extended Learning Time Saturday Academy Lunch time PM School During the school day at a time student schedule permits. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Teacher or counselor recommendation Individualized per student needs 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 47  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 48 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Individualized counseling and support in collaboration with the CBO. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). tbd 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 48  tbd 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 0 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 49  Section 10: Career and Technical Education (CTE) Programs (Requirement for “Out of Time” Priority High Schools) Directions: In this section, provide a description of the Career and Technical Education (CTE) program offerings at schools in Good Standing that students in this school will have access to during the 2018-19 school year. Two different tracks are offered: Information Technology and Law. Each track is requires students to enroll into a three year sequence of courses beginning in 10th grade. The IT track offers students the opportunity to graduate from high school with a minimum of 2 major certifications (A+ and Testout PC Pro) as well as a number of minor certifications. The IT program begins with a one year course involving cabling and construction of a computer. The second year introduces students to creating networks and troubleshooting system problems. The third year culminates in the Cisco Academy, an internationally recognized curriculum and certifications. The coursework also prepares students for postsecondary education and/or the skills to directly enter the workforce. Work based learning experiences are provided through the Work-based Learning program (current partner is Intergenerational an Office in the Department of Aging), industry guest speakers and the school’s Mouse Squad. These experiences provide students with a real-world context in which they can apply the knowledge learned in class as well as, an opportunity to develop the positive habits and employability skills require for success in the workplace. The courses use a blended model of large and small group instruction, self-guided web-based instruction, virtual labs, and hands-on learning. The multiple instructional strategies and tools provide the instructors with several ways to provide differentiation by content, process and product. To continue the development of the IT program to meet industry needs partnerships have been established to provide guidance for future course development. Additionally, instructors remain current by engaging in professional development opportunities and evolving certifications. The Law track provides students with a three year sequence of law related courses as well as Moot Court and Mock Trial teams. Students have the opportunity to intern with local lawyers. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 50  Section 11: Professional Development Plan (Requirement for “Out of Time” Priority Schools) Directions: In this section, provide a description of the mandatory professional development that will be provided to school leadership and staff during the 2018-19 school year. Include any professional development that will occur during the summer months. Professional Development at Lehman High School will be responsive to the needs of the LHS community and to the school-wide and Renewal Initiatives. The Professional Development Committee will meet bi-weekly to plan professional development offerings and revise Professional Development Plan as needed based on teacher needs, as evidenced by ADVANCE data, as well as interests. The PD Committee will convene in the Spring of 2016 to draft a professional development plan for the 2016-2017 school year, including the mandatory summer professional development that will occur the last week in August for all LHS staff. Coaching - Summer 2016 through June 2017 SRI coaches in ELA, Math, and Social Studies will work with selected teachers to receive intensive coaching and build capacity so that these teachers become teacher leaders within their departments. The coaches will work in aligning instruction across grades when they work with individual and small groups of teachers. Coaches will also provide professional learning opportunities, facilitate common planning, assist in arranging within-school inter-visitations so that teachers can see colleagues exemplary practice, and guide the development of unit and lesson plans as per grade level curriculum maps and pacing calendars. Teachers will be held responsible for implementing strategies developed through coaching. Evidence of implementation will be reflected in ADVANCE reports from formal and informal observations. Mandatory Summer Professional Development - Final week of August Mandatory Summer Professional Development will be held the final week in August for all teachers and staff of Lehman High School. This week of professional development will be geared towards getting the LHS community prepared for the onset of the school year, and to ensure that we are all working towards common goals in unison. Topics will include: ● Content specific curriculum unpacking ● Instructional focus and effective strategies for making the instructional focus visible in classrooms ● Writing Is Thinking Bootcamp ● Classroom Environment: Structures and Procedures for Success ● Danielson Framework ● Restorative Justice Monday Afternoon Professional Development Cycles - September 2016 through June 2017 Monday afternoon professional development time will be organized into month-long professional learning cycles, focusing on topics of interest and need. Topics may include the following: ● Using Data to Inform Instruction ● Learning Standards 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 51  ● Academic Rigor ● Using Interim Assessments Effectively ● Academic Vocabulary ● Questioning and Discussion ● Assessment and Instruction ● Engaging Students in Learning ● Writing is Thinking Strategies ● Social Emotional Programs. ● Effective Communication with Families ● Collaborating for School Success: Getting on Board ● Planning Instruction using Common-Core Curriculum ● Strategic Inquiry: ● Use of protocols to examine student work ● Differentiation ● Supports of ELLs and SWDs ● Using student data: Skedula The cycles will include grade study, subject area study, and inquiry group study. Teachers’ ratings in ADVANCE and Cabinet Inquiry will guide the selection of topics for the Monday afternoon professional learning times. Common Planning/Teacher Teams - September 2016 through June 2017 on a weekly basis Sharing best practices is essential in the development of teachers through structured collaborative time. As such, the LHS program will allow time for teachers to meet in department, grade, and interdisciplinary teams. During this time, teachers will engage in the following: ● Unpacking curriculum ● Developing and revising curriculum and unit maps ● Planning effective lessons ● Creating differentiated student tasks ● Analyzing student work through strategic inquiry 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 52  ● Lesson study ● Effective strategies study ● Developing common assessments Off-site Professional Development - Summer 2016 through June 2017 At Lehman High School, we encourage staff to seek professional development opportunities outside of school to further develop their skills in their specific areas of expertise. LHS will work with the Superintendent’s Office, Office of Renewal Schools, and other partners to coordinate professional development offerings for staff. It is the expectation that staff who attend off-site professional development return to the school and turn-key new learning within their departments or during school-wide professional development, as applicable. Topics will include: ● Leading Strategic Inquiry (Train the Trainer) ● Writing is Thinking Strategies ● EngageNY Professional Development in ELA and Math ● New Visions Professional Development for Social Studies and Science ● Superintendent’s Principal’s Meetings ● Superintendent’s Assistant Principal’s Meetings ● DataWise ● Offerings from the Division of ELL’s ● Restorative Justice ● Life Space Crisis Intervention 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 53  Section 12: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Lehman High School's goal is to have all Highly Qualified Teachers in all content areas as well as in the Career and Technical Education Components. In order to meet this goal, we recruit at fairs for any positions that are open as provided by the New York City Department of Education and the Office of Renewal Schools. We also reach out to local universities, such as Lehman College, Hunter University, and Fordham University to recruit teacher graduates. To maintain retention, we provide mentoring throughout the first year of teaching, provide on site and off site professional development in content areas and in pedagogy, encourage classroom visits on site as well as with other high schools. We provide targeted feedback and offer support during cycles of observation using the Danielson Framework. Teachers' assignments are planned according to licensing. We carefully align instructional needs of our students across grade levels with corresponding teachers and provide common planning time for collaboration both in grade teams and vertical content teams. Support is ongoing and consistent. Teachers are frequently surveyed to determine areas in need of support, topics for professional development as well as being encouraged to facilitate professional development around topics they would like to highlight and share with their peers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teachers are provided with opportunities to meet in grade level teams, vertical content teams, and interdisciplinary teams. Additionally, full faculty professional development is held on Mondays for 80 minutes. During professional development days, topics are explored to address Common Core learning standards and all teachers receive professional development in alignment to the school’s instructional focus as well as Danielson Advance ratings. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 54  NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. ● Lead teachers work closely with administration and other teachers across content areas during their Circular 6 assignments designing common assessments. ● A Measure of Student Learning (MOSL) committee was established and designed to perform precisely this function of selecting and using multiple assessments. ● A Professional Development Committee, comprised of teachers, was formed and engage in formulating professional development workshops, including using formative assessment in instruction. ● Professional Development is offered by the Office of Renewal Schools and outside developers on the use of assessment in curriculum units and lesson plans. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 55  Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, ELT 5A, 5D, ELT 5A, 5B, 5C, 5E, ELT 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, ELT 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E, ELT 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows: 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 56   Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG or SIF funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 57  Section 13: Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 08X405 Herbert H. Lehman High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 08X405 Herbert H. Lehman High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Families of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 58  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parent Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 59   to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 08X405 Herbert H. Lehman High School , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 60  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 61  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 62  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 63  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 64  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 65  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our total population of students is 946, of which 101 are English Language Learners (as identified by the ELL Identification Process). Of that number, approximately 11 students have failed the New York State Regents Exam in English Language Arts. The majority of our ELLs are Latino (80%), inclusive of former ELLs. These students appear in all cohorts (V,U,T, S) indicative of their year of entrance into high school in NYS as determined by the NYCDOE however, some of these students may appear in different grade levels (9-12), as some are under-credited or lacking certain promotion criteria. Out of 15 eligible ELLs who sat for the ELA Regents last year, only 26.67% passed the exam with a 65 or above. In order to address the specific academic concerns of our ELLs we are providing structures to increase their credit accumulation and graduation rate. The proposed Title III LEP Program will be called iLit Rewards support and will support Lehman High School's ELLs with content area support for ELA. Students in the supplementary iLit Rewards support program will receive in-depth preparation to succeed on the ELA Regents, as well as in their regular instruction. The knowledge and skills acquired during the iLit Rewards support program for ELLs, will promote their academic growth and will afford students the opportunity to gain skills and fulfill the requirements toward graduation as supplemental materials and learning. Students will begin with Rewards preparations, focusing on the use of phonics, and will move towards iLit blended learning with reading scaffolded for their individual level. Moreover, the skills and knowledge obtained will carry over into the regular school day, thereby enhancing each participant’s success. Teachers will take attendance to maintain records and parents will be notified of their child's participation with letters sent home in the parent's preferred language using a translator. The iLit licenses will be at cost to Title III, while Rewards is not at cost to Title III. A specific number of ELLs, most specifically SIFE and newcomer ELL students (focusing specifically on entering, emerging and transitioning), have been identified and strategically chosen to participate in the iLit Rewards support program, although all ELLs will be invited to participate. The teachers who will provide instruction in the iLit Rewards support program for the ELA course are certified ESL teachers. This will begin in late October/ early November. The proposed iLit Rewards support program will consist of two sections of approximately 10- 20 students and will meet one day after-school for 30 weeks for a total of 3 hours per week. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 66  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: Student achievement gaps amongst our ELLs in comparison to the mainstream population provide us data that support the dire need for targeted professional development for teachers and the revamping of existing curricula in ESL. Ongoing professional development led by the ELA Lead Teacher and the Assistant Principal will cover planning unit maps aligned to ELA CCLS (unpacking and planning the curriculum) and ESL standards and developing curricula across all levels of ESL that is rigorous and promotes student language acquisition, that is correlated to the HMH Collections units. The decision to focus on curriculum is a direct result of our ELL student data (ELA AYP and Regents passing rate). ESL Teachers meet daily during period 3 during their Circular 6 assignment (at no cost to Title III). ESL Teachers will be provided time before or after school, as well as during the summer, to develop curriculum as needed with the support of the ESL Instructional Lead Teacher to enhance and maximize their work during the day. We will also meet once a week for scheduled Professional Development, driven by teacher and student needs. These sessions will focus specifically on using assessment/ data, as well as instructional strategies, to improve student outcomes and success. Teachers will also be attending REWARDS Professional Development program at no cost to Title 3. This will be a series of sessions throughout the year, targeted on using REWARDS successfully with students. This is offered through the School Renewal Program, and will help to determine the success of the Rewards program with Ell students. Data will be derived by looking at student work. Attendance will be kept at off-site PD and teachers will hold onto agendas for their records. Agendas and attendance will be held by the assistant principal in charge of ENL. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our College Application Workshop Series is an added opportunity for our school to increase parental engagement and participation of the parents of our ELLs. These parent engagement workshops will take place on 2 Saturdays for 2 hours, or evenings, to support ELL parents and students with the college application process. Two guidance counselors experienced in the college application process will meet with parents and students via scheduled individual and group sessions to guide them step by step with applying to college, applying for financial aid, scholarships, resume writing and to resolve any inquiries or concerns. They will be paid at cost 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 67  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities to Title III. These series of events are designed to encourage students to apply to college and increase their post-secondary options. This also supports the daily work by the College Office team and guidance counselors with regards to this process and serves as an extension of these services in an effort to increase ELL parental engagement at our school. After speaking with parents, it was determined that this was a crucial need, as many parents are not familiar with the process. Invitations will be translated with the help of staff. The needs of parents are evaluated in informal and formal ways through parent-teacher conferences, meetings, workshops, surveys, school events, PTA meetings, etc. The educators and administrators listen and have a conversation with parents, and try to answer their questions and concerns. We also communicate with parents through mailings and phone calls that explain about college resources and activities, and are translated for ELL parents when available. The translation/interpretation unit may be used, if needed, although we frequently rely on the assistance of multilingual parents and staff. Agendas and attendance will be held by the assistant principal in charge of ENL. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) N/A  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 68 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. N/A TOTAL N/A 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 69  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Herbert H. Lehman High School Borough select one School Number 405 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal John Powers Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Shantae Mahecha Teacher/Subject Area NA Teacher/Subject Area NA Related-Service Provider NA Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Dana Szalkiewicz Coach NA School Counselor Leiloni Leiva- Rich Parent Lisa Mateo Parent Coordinator Rosaline Torruella Field Support Center Staff Member NA Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 906 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 70 Total number of ELLs 150 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 16.56%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): NA If yes, indicate language(s): NA Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? This year, we utilized the GMRT results, as well as Rewards and teacher-created assessments to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. Teachers were also trained in the use of iLit and its assessments. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers were trained in the use of both iLit and Rewards. Not only did teachers attend professional learning sessions, but they were also visited by coaches and attended intervisitations. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? This year, we utilized the GMRT results, as well as Rewards and teacher-created assessments to guide instructional planning for our ELLs. Teachers were also trained in the use of iLit and its assessments. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 71  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students will be strategically programmed to be in freestanding or push-in ENL classes based on what is discovered by the summative data. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use data to guide instruction of ELLs in a variety of ways. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. One of the biggest determinations that we use to evaluate and inform our ENL programs are the results of the NYSESLAT. Additionally, we use GMRT findings as well as teacher observations. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? We rely on strategic programming to properly place our ENL students in the correct setting. Additionally, we offer ENL Academy for students after school, focusing on entering and emerging populations, as well as SIFE students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In standalone classes, students are essentially grouped homogeneously as per CR Part 154.2, as determined by their proficiency level. In integrated ENL classes, students are grouped by grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. NA c. DL program. If applicable. NA 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We ensure that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to proficiency levels by the use of strategic programs. Standalone ENL classes may occur in a single or double period, while many integrated classes have a daily push-in ENL teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered in English, although print versions of text are translated with a focus on key vocabulary. Additionally teachers provide a variety of visuals, as well as auditory scaffolds. iLit, for example, provides lexiled text for all learners and provides translations and visuals. If a student would like to hear an audio reading, they are also available in both English and the student's primary language. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 72  4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year by working closely with our ENL coordinator. She offers tips and strategies, as well as translated documents. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We are currently looking into a curriculum for SIFE students developed by Dr. Salavert and Fordham University. Newcomer and developing ENL students are in standalone ENL classes and use either Rewards or iLit, respectively. Long term ELLs receive support from push-in ENL teachers, as well as core content teachers who received training and strategies from the BFSC. Former ELLs are encouraged to continue to challenge themselves, but also receive ENL serves as per the Chancellor's Part 154. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers incorporate graphic novels, audios, visuals, and translations. Teachers also chunk instruction and provide cross-content application of concepts, to help tie learning together, making it more comprehensible. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We provide ELL teachers in a variety of settings, including self-contained and ICT, based on the student's IEP. ENL and SWD teachers then work together to support the student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs include Rewards and Think Through Math. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We would like to continue to tweak our existing ENL curriculums to further differentiate for all ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? NA 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given a voice in their programs when applicable and have all opportunities to join any after school or supplemental programs. Additionally, they can attend ENL Academy. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. We currently use iLit, Rewards, and Think Through Math. Additionally, HMH is scaffolded appropriately. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? we are currently looking to hire bilingual teachers to assist in home language support. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 73  Students take the GMRT, which provides lexiles for students. Additionally, iLit and Rewards also assess reading levels and provide content that corresponds to ELLs' ages and grade levels. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Assistant Principals meet to share resources and curriculum ideas. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school counselors, parent coordinator, and ENL coordinator help tp transition newly enrolled ELLs. We offer a bridge program over the summer, as well as an ENL Academy during the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Italian and Spanish are offered to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We offer a series of workshops on team-teaching that focused on ENL students, for all staff members. Dr. Salavert also met with teachers to further coach them on team-teaching. Additionally, ENL teachers underwent rigorous trainings for both Rewards and iLit. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All teachers received training on team teaching with a focus on team teaching with ENL push-ins. This was a series of PDs that spoke to the different models and the pros and cons of each. Additionally, ENL teachers throughout the year met with a specialized ENL coach and attended multiple iLit and Rewards PD sessions. The BFSC has also offered us support with both targeted meetings, as well as recommending particular strategies. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 74  All parents of ELLs are contacted throughout the year for updates on their child's progress and needs. If necessary, we use translation services to assist us in conducting these meetings. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are invited in for events such as college planning, filling out FAFSAs, and community building. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. NA 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 75 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, John Powers, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 76  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Lehman HS School DBN: 08X405 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) John Powers Title Principal Dana Szalkiewicz Assistant Principal Rosaline Tourrella Parent Coordinator Shantae Mahecha ENL/Bilingual Teacher Lisa Mateo Parent tbd TBD tbd tbd tbd Carron Staple tbd tbd tbd tbd Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member tbd Other tbd Other tbd Other tbd Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 77  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08X405 School Name: Herbert H. Lehman HS Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Rosaline Tourrella Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The information from the ATS RHSP (Individual Student Profile) provides us with the data about the primary language spoken by each parent as well as the preferred language of communication with the Department. We also utilize emergency "blue" cards and Home Language Identification Survey to collect pertinent home language information. The Pupil Personnel Department, Guidance Department, and our ESL Compliance Specialist coordinate the gathering and dissemination of this information vital for keeping parents informed and involved. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 78  Language Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu, Albanian, French, Chinese Written Preferred Percent Written Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu, Albanian, French, Chinese Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu, Albanian, French, Chinese Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish, Bengali, Arabic, Urdu, Albanian, French, Chinese 100 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families Calendars, parent-teacher conferences, announcements, after-school and ELT program information, NYS testing dates, status of the school letters from leadership, ELL Parent Orientation and Meetings etc. As described in school calendar translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated in-house or through use of DOE translation services as managed by the Parent Coordinator. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 79  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? In house or through DOE translation services as managed by the Parent Coordinator Parent Teacher Conferences ELL Parent Orientation and Meetings. Family Night CBO East Side Settlement House does daily outreach as well as Guidance Counselors. Attendance Teachers do home visits and Family Assistants make daily outreach attendance calls. As calendered Open Houses are twice a year. Our doors are open to parents everyday on a walk in basis. Parent Association, Title 1 have Parent Engagement Workshops. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. K12 alerts can translate into some languages. Otherwise, we can use DOE translation services to record a message in that language or to facilitate a phone call. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. We will review on Staff Orientation, and our LAC/Parent Coordinator will monitor compliance. PD for all staff on how the use the Translation and International unit to communicate with parents. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 80  Teachers, Guidance Counselors and staff will have all letters and/or documents translated in the difference languages for our school. Every office will have I speak cards to help identify the parent preferred language Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parent Coordinator employs the DOE Translation Unit to ensure timely translation of school documents. In accordance with A-E of Section VII of Chancellors Regulation A-663, The Parents Bill of Rights, interpretation notice signs are displayed in the building. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents would be surveyed at the end of each encounter to gather feedback from them on the quality and availability of services. 2017-18 RSCEP-ON 81 
