2018-19 RENEWAL SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (RSCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X412 School Name: BRONX HIGH SCHOOL OF BUSINESS Principal: ALICE BAJANA-VEGA 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 1  Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 4: Renewal School Narrative Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Community School Description Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 10: Title I Program Information Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx High School of Business 09X412 320900011412 9-12 School Number (DBN): 240 East 172 Street Bronx, NY 10457 718-410-4060 718-992-5760 Phone Number: Alice Bajana-Vega abajana@schools.nyc.gov Fax: Email Address: Committee for Hispanic Children and Families School Contact Person: Community School CBO: Principal: Community School Director: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: Alice Bajana-Vega Ruben Rivera Danielle Tutelian Lydia Hampton Alice Bajana-Vega MaryiDuarte District Information Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2 Metro Tech 3rd Floor Brooklyn, New York 11201 malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 935-3074 Phone Number: 718-935-3074 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 3  Bronx FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 4  Section 2: Executive Summary and Organizing Principles The Objective The intent of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) is to continue to frame a three-year process for each Renewal school and design a comprehensive plan that outlines a strategic path to a paradigm shift in each school at every level. The motivation driving this work is our commitment to providing every child with a school that meets their academic and social-emotional needs. Closely accompanying this imperative is our belief that every school can be renewed and foster a community based culture of learning. The job of the district is to use our position to provide the systemic vision, strategies, and resources to facilitate school renewal through a collaborative effort including all stakeholders. The core values held as essential for the success of the School Renewal Program:  A “learning stance” must be held by all community members (district leaders, school leaders, school staff, community-based partners, students and families). The work should be approached with humility and integrity. We must all be willing learners.  A “theory of action” must guide the work to ensure clarity and coherence.  Authentic teams that collaborate in the spirit of trust, within and across the various levels of the school community, are prerequisites for successful school renewal  Schools will be places of robust engagement, anchored in positive youth development, ensuring that the school environment is welcoming and empowering for students, families and community members.  Strong professional development/learning is a fundamental part of our work.  The school renewal implementation must be simultaneously dynamic and responsive as well as sustained over the three year period of renewal. The organizing Theory of Action that guides the School Renewal Program strategy: By using the Six Elements of the Framework for Great schools as our improvement structure, we seek to align instructional coaching and leadership development with structural supports in order to build staff capacity. Using schools instructional foci, school leaders and staff will implement changes in curriculum, instruction, school culture and structures so that there are sustainable improvements in student outcomes and school culture. The arc of the School Renewal Program strategy: In order to attain high levels of achievement for all students in Renewal schools we must build capacity to increase student achievement through the adoption of new attitudes and behaviors, research based strategies that improve teacher practice, coupled with the use of clear data driven supports for building students’ skills in the content areas and increasing student engagement. We are particularly prioritizing reading and writing across the curricula. The use of student learning data will drive instruction through strong teacher teams; onsite, job embedded professional learning and problem solving, and accountability at all levels of the system: central, district and school - for results. Renewal schools are provided with intensive training, leadership and pedagogical coaching, and structural supports, monitoring of implementation and ongoing feedback and revisions as needed. Further, each Renewal school will become a Community School and strategically partner with community based organizations (CBO) to integrate social services and expanded learning time into the fabric of the school to help them better serve the needs of students. These schools will stand as centers of opportunities where families can get the supports they need to make sure students come to school ready and able to learn. School Receivership In April 2015, state lawmakers and Governor Andrew Cuomo created section 211-f of the State Education Law, which established the School Receivership program as a new intervention strategy to turn around struggling schools. This new law, and Commissioner’s regulation 100.19, requires that “Persistently Struggling Schools,” defined as Priority Schools that have been in the most severe accountability status since the 2006-07 school year, be given an initial one or two-year period under a “Superintendent Receiver”. These schools were placed in receivership under the New York City Schools Chancellor. Each school must make demonstrable improvement on specific benchmarks or it will be placed under an independent receiver. Under the Chancellor’s Receivership Plan, the School Renewal Program is NYCDOE’s 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 5  core strategy for turning around struggling schools. Renewal Schools have already begun implementing significant interventions and are receiving additional resources and support to accelerate student performance and help close achievement gaps reflected in this RSCEP. Structure of the Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) The Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP) will serve as the organizing and overarching document for each Renewal school and will be directly aligned and developed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, and Strong Schools, Strong Communities, including the following:  Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks: Demonstrable improvement benchmarks located in the 2018-19 RSCEP, in the Data and Accountability Snapshot page. Receivership benchmarks have been closely aligned with the Renewal benchmarks so that schools will have one coherent set of improvement benchmarks to meet. All Receivership Benchmarks are a subset of Renewal Benchmarks. While the targets for these overlapping benchmarks are not always identical, the Receivership Benchmark targets are always equal to or lower that the Renewal Benchmarks targets. That means that any school that meets its Renewal Benchmarks targets have by definition also met its Receivership Benchmarks targets. For additional information on Receivership demonstrable improvement benchmarks go here.  Establishing an overarching summative vision aligned with elements of the Framework for Great Schools and documenting key areas of celebration and renewal through analysis of assessments and by envisioning what the desired outcome for each school will be at the end of the School Renewal process.  Setting interim assessment benchmarks that create the path for improvement by focusing on desired outcomes and goals. In this way, the plan will be mapped to the overarching summative vision. In addition to the five discrete goals formed around the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, each school will create an action plan.  Transformation into a community school in order to increase student and family access to physical and mental health services and other social-emotional supports made available in or near the school.  Expanded learning opportunities for all students, including additional instruction provided during afterschool  and/or summer programming provided in collaboration with community partners. Intensive professional development for all staff to ensure effective implementation of curriculum and instruction aligned to the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) and to support staff in effectively responding to the differentiated academic and social-emotional needs of all students.  Additional, focused strategies to increase parent and family engagement. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Information on the Framework for Great Schools and the DTSDE Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 6  The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and RSCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 7  School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets: 1. Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity 2. Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions 3. Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support 4. Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions 5. Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and 6. Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the RSCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the RSCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 8  Next Steps for RSCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists in every Renewal school and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the American Institute of Research (AIR) needs assessment, the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Create a summative vision for the elements of the Framework for Great Schools.  Step 5: Revisit your school’s current goals, and strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you have identified, and will let your school community know when you have reached your goal.  Step 6: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Complete the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and the Community School sections.  Step 9: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether strategies and activities outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust practices along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 9  Section 3: Community Engagement Team and School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Directions: All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Renewal School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). SLT members’ signatures indicates that they have been consulted with and given the opportunity to provide feedback on the plan and the plan’s alignment with the school-based budget to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Expanded Learning Time, Community School initiative, Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the second column. 2. 3. In the first column, indicate using an “X” if the person is an SLT member. In the third column, record the position and constituent group represented such as staff, parent, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), or other contributor. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 4. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the RSCEP, not approval. 5. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X x X X X Name Position and Constituent Group Alice Bajana-Vega Danielle Tutelian Lydia Hampton Batie Ramsahai MaryiDuarte Ruben Rivera Rosanna Ortega BryannaGabriel Represented *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Community School Director (staff) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 10 Signature (Blue Ink) Check if SLT X X X X X X 0 0 0 0 0 0 Name Position and Constituent Group JohanaPinet Maria Calderon Rafael Gomez Donna Campbell n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Represented Parent Association Secretary Parent Parent Teacher n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Community Engagement Team (CET) Signature Page Directions: Please fill out this form and indicate members of your Community Engagement Team. On the chart below: 1. List the names of each Community Engagement Team member in the first column. 2. Record the position and constituent group represented in the second column. 3. Community Engagement Team members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If a Community Engagement Team member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original signature page. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alice Bajana-Vega Principal 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 11 Signature (Blue Ink) Name Position and Constituent Group Elizabeth Solis Ruben Rivera Luis Ortiz Lydia Hampton Rosanna Ortega ShawannaWatson Danielle Tutelian N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Represented UFTChapter Leader Community School Director Parent Coordinator PA President Student Student Teacher N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 12  Section 4: Renewal School Narrative In a brief narrative, describe the current state of the Renewal school addressing the following: 1. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including your school’s mission statement and a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 2. What are the school’s beliefs about student learning? 3. 4. Describe your school’s approach to family engagement and progress made with establishing families as Identify any special student populations that the school has and what their specific needs are. partners in furthering student achievement 5. Describe how your school is leveraging community school partnerships to support progress in elements of the Framework for Great Schools and indicate where this has been a challenge. 6. Summarize the Expanded Learning Time (ELT) opportunities that have been offered to your students this year. The Bronx High School of Business (BHSB) is located in the South Bronx on the William Howard Taft Educational Campus. BHSB is a Title I school with a total population of 248 students and a projected enrollment of 286. All of our students are entitled to free lunch. The student body is comprised of 23% Black, 72% Hispanic or Latino; 44% of our students are English Language Learners (ELLs), and 25% are Students with Disabilities. BHSB's mission is to teach, nurture and empower students with the skills needed to succeed in today's world. We strive to help our students become critical thinkers who are ready to compete in college and the workplace environment. It is our core belief that all students possess the ability to achieve success as a result of rigorous, meaningful instruction and support. To that end, we strive to provide our students with opportunities to participate in collaborative, meaningful learning activities with peers and adults. BSHB has a significant number of English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. These groups of students have a range of academic and social-emotional needs; a high percentage of them are overage and/or under-credited. Some of the academic needs relate to English language acquisition and mastery, deficiencies in reading, writing and mathematics. Several of our ELLs face difficulty transitioning and adjusting to a new school setting and developing peer relationships. In addition to a learning disability, many of our SWDs also experience social-emotional problems. Consequently, these groups of students are unable to accumulate sufficient credits and Regents exam to be on track to graduate in four years. At BHSB, we recognize that forming strong partnerships with parents is crucial for students' social-emotional and academic success. As such, we are continuously looking for new ways to engage parents. There will be new supports and structures that will be implemented this upcoming school year to ensure that there is consistent and meaningful communication with parents, that parents have opportunities to be more involved in activities with their children within the school, and that there is a space to welcome parents where they will have access to resources. A Parent Welcome Center will be established on the first floor of the campus in collaboration with the other campus schools. Our parent coordinator will greet parents there and connect them to the appropriate school staff based on their needs. Parent Coordinators from the campus will collaborate on a campus parent newsletter, workshops, and information sessions. Kinvolved, an online platform used to communicate instantaneously with parents via text, will be continued to be used to communicate with parents regarding student attendance, progress in class, upcoming assignments and events, and other important announcements. Through Kinvolved, parents can directly reply to the staff member sending the messages at the moment they receive the communication. Monthly Parent Involvement Days will also be instituted so that parents have the opportunity to volunteer at the school and visit their children's 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 13  classes. Parents will be surveyed at different functions throughout the year to ensure the school is addressing their needs and meeting their expectations. BHSB continuously strives to cultivate strong partnerships and collaborations with various organizations to provide our students with an enriching high school experience. These include our lead CBO, the Committee for Hispanic Children & Families; Virtual Enterprise (VE); Broome Street Academy Charter High School; New Settlement Apartments’ Student Success Center; ActionNYC; the Center for Supportive Schools; Peer Enable Restructured Classrooms; and Blue Engine. The Committee for Hispanic Children & Families (CHCF), a community based organization, enriches the experiences for the school community. A critical part of the work of CHCF in collaboration with the school-based attendance team was to develop attendance intervention plans for targeted students to improve overall school attendance. The small group counseling programs developed by CHCF targets various groups of students, including such as at-risk students and newcomer ELLs. Students are provided with opportunities to participate in paid internships to gain real work experience. CHCF also sponsors programs to increase family involvement. In addition, CHCF coordinated the relationships across all Community Based Organizations on the campus servicing BHSB. These partnerships have a strong focus on restorative justice practices and creating opportunities for students to be college and career ready. Through Virtual Enterprise (VE), our students have opportunities to obtain paid internships and industry certification with Microsoft Office Suite. For the past 3 years, BHSB has made it to the city level competition. During the 2018-2019 year, the VE will enhance the educational experience by infusing math and writing into the VE curriculum. The New Settlement Apartments' Student Success Center is a youth-led college access center located on the Taft school campus. The SSC staff hires current students from the schools on the campus to work in partnership to develop awareness about college and to guide other students through the college search, application, and financial aid process. These Youth Leaders are specifically trained to help their peers explore, understand, and access the college admission process and are paid for their work. SSC holds college fairs in he building for our 11th grade students, organized college trips for all students, provides workshops for parents about the college admission process and financial aid process. Through the Peer Group Connection (PGC), Center for Supportive Schools trains BHSB teachers to teach leadership courses to select groups of 11th and 12th graders, who in turn education and support our grade 9th grade students. The goal is to enable and inspire young adults to become engaged leaders who positively influence their peers. The program taps into the power of high school juniors and seniors to create a nurturing environment for incoming freshmen. Once per week, peer leader mentors meet with 10-14 mentees in outreach sessions designed to strengthen relationship among students across grades, improve their personal and intrapersonal and academic skills. Peer leaders are simultaneously enrolled in daily, for-credit, year-long leadership course taught by teachers during regular school hours. PGC has had a positive impact on school climate and culture and credit accumulation. Through our collaboration with FSC Instructional Leads, teachers at BHSB receive support to build their capacity in knowledge of curriculum and best teaching practices. Coaches support teachers in aligning units and lessons to Common Core Learning Standards, designing coherent instruction, incorporating literacy and writing strategies, using formative and summative assessment data to drive instruction, and engaging students in active, meaningful learning experiences. This support is provided on a weekly basis to core content teachers through department team meetings and in-classroom support. Coaches also collaborate with BHSB's school leadership team to design a professional learning arc for the school, plan professional development sessions, and co-facilitate these sessions as needed. BHSB has the Peer Enabled Restructured Classroom (PERC). As part of this initiative, teachers receive training to supervise students who have excelled in Mathematics and Science to become Teaching Assistant Scholars (TAS). TAS students serve as peer teachers under the supervision of licensed teachers, and the work with 4-5 students in Algebra and Earth Science. For the 2018-2019 school year, the PERC model will continue to be implemented in algebra classes 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 14  to increase student ownership, engagement and to help all our students meet college and career readiness benchmarks in ELA and Mathematics. BHSB will partner with Blue Engine for the third year to increase academic rigor and prepare all students for post-secondary success. To ensure students build a strong foundation in high school, Blue Engine recruits, trains and supports Blue Engine Teaching Assistants (BETAs), recent college graduates who collaborate with teachers to help students develop and strengthen their skills in mathematics, literacy and social cognition before they set foot on campus. Blue Engine will place BETAs at BHSB in Mathematics and ELA. BETAs will collaborate with the teachers to develop student-centered lessons that incorporate reading, writing, problem solving solving skills based on data from formative assessment. BETAs will be paired with teachers that serve a serve a diverse student population including ELLs and SWDs. Through our partnership with the Broome Street Academy Charter School, BHSB piloted the Champion Model program that connects all students (CHAMPS) with a supportive adult (CHAMPION) with the school to meet regularly to build relational trust, help students self-advocate, develop attendance and academic plans, and problem-solve. This year all of the seniors and off-track juniors have been assigned to a Champion. BHSB had 23 Champions that volunteered to support a total of 71 Champs. For the 2018-2019 school year, Extended Learning Time will be embedded into the school day. The additional time will be used to provide students not only with opportunities to address credit gaps, but also provide students with enrichment course offerings as well as courses to address students' academic needs. These courses include an additional period of Math instruction for ELLs in the 9th grade to get them prepared to take the CC Algebra regents at the end of their first year in high school, AP courses in English Literature and Composition, U.S. History, and Spanish, PERC, Music Production Recording, Weight Training, etc. Additionally, class periods will be extended to an hour long block to provide students with additional time to engage in rigorous thinking. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 15  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X412 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 284 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 49 45 6 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 13 6 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 86.3% % Reduced Lunch 39.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.4% 72.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.88 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 69% 67% 57.4% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO No N/A 94 83 2 82.4% 0.0% 25.0% 22.9% 2.5% 0.7% 4 15% 7 N/A N/A 73% 61% 57.9% 4% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 16  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 17  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths of our school relative to the Framework for Great Schools in Rigorous Instruction are as follows:  As evidenced by the 2018 Quality Review report, the school is using curricula aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) in all core content areas- "Review of the curricular materials revealed evidence of alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards and content area standards, as well as the integration of the instructional shifts."   Teachers collaborate with content area coaches around the implementation of CCLS aligned content and skills School leaders provide specific and actionable feedback to teachers on the implementation of the CCLS aligned  task; evidence of this is referenced in our most recent QR report- "To support with planning, teachers are provided with a cognitively complex task implementation tool that is to be used to assess the quality of academic tasks." School leaders and content coaches provide support to teachers on how to provide entry points into the CCLS curricula for all students including SWDs an ELLs. Evidence of this practice is supported in our May 2018 Quality Review report- "Academic tasks are planned and adjusted to provide access for all students as evidenced by documents that included two to three versions of the same task with adjustments based on the learning needs of students." School Leaders have provided professional development on how to create cognitively engaging tasks for all students including SWD and ELLs. Evidence of this practice is referenced in our 2018 QR report, namely, "To  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 18  support with planning, teachers are provided with a cognitively complex task implementation tool that is to be used to assess the quality of academic tasks." Needs of our school have been identified as follows: Pedagogy:  As per the 2018 School Quality Review, teaching practices are beginning to reflect the school’s instructional belief that students need to be provided with complex tasks that provide multiple entry points. There is an uneven application of instructional strategies aligned to the curricula that promote student demonstration of higher-order thinking. Students are not yet consistently provided with multiple entry points in all classrooms. There was uneven engagement in appropriately challenging tasks by all students.  Based on informal classroom observations and ADVANCE data from this year, approximately 44% of teachers were rated "Developing" or "Ineffective" on 3c (Engaging Students in Learning) and 64% were rated "Developing" or "Ineffective" in 3b (Questioning and Discussion Techniques).  As per Principal Performance Review, "While the school is becoming aligned to a coherent set of practices aligned to common beliefs about how students learn best, and the task are aligned to the Common Core, we observed student work products and discussions that reflect uneven levels of student thinking and participation." Improve Assessment for Learning: While we earned a proficient rating for our assessment practices on the 2018 Quality Review, there remains areas that we will continue to improve to ensure that all teachers are consistently using data across classrooms to impact students learning. Our 2018 IIT report pointed out the need for instructional leaders to model for teachers how to use instructional data to plan for groups of students and to hold teachers accountable for the implementation of at least versions of task to meet the needs of students -"During department inquiry meetings and/or weekly professional learning sessions, the school leader, assistant principal, and master teachers should model how to analyze data from formative assessments to inform the planning of lessons that meet the learning needs of all students in the classroom. School leaders should monitor subsequent lesson plans to hold teachers accountable for developing lessons that provide multiple entry points for at least two groups of students and provide developmental feedback and support to teachers as required." Part 2 – Summative Vision for Rigorous Instruction What is your school’s instructional focus? What is your vision for promoting the instructional focus consistently across classrooms? School's instructional focus: If teachers explicitly teach and monitor daily the use of research-based strategies to access cognitively complex tasks, then students will be able to demonstrate transference of relevant strategies to successfully complete regents aligned tasks. Vision for Promoting Instructional Focus: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 19  Common Core aligned curricula in the core content areas will continue to be implemented. Teachers will continue receiving specific professional development on the revising and refining of CCLs units and tasks to make it accessible to all students.  Teacher teams will examine student work in inquiry teams, monitor the implementation of WIT strategies and make revisions to lesson plans and units maps.  Assessments of and for learning will be ongoing. Teachers will design common CCLS and regents aligned assessments and tasks collaboratively. Decisions will be made based on this data.  Consistency in instructional practices, assessments, and curriculum alignment will be supported by teacher team meetings, a frequent cycle of observation aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching, collaboration between teachers and Renewal Coaches and professional development addressing areas of development. What is your vision for the implementation of CCLS-aligned curricula that meets the needs of your diverse learners, personally, academically, and culturally?  Teachers will continue implementing common core aligned units in ELA and Mathematics from EngageNY. Revisions will be made based on the needs of students, analysis of student work through inquiry and the work of teacher teams.  Teacher teams will use all sources of student data from a range of sources such as SKEDULA, common formative assessments, New Visions Student Sorter, transcripts, IEPs, NYSESLAT and Regents, to make decisions about strategic grouping, provide either scaffolds or extensions for students. Inquiry teams will examine student work using the ATLAS protocol and DataWise and identify specific instructional strategies to improve instruction.   Teachers will incorporate a variety of strategies to make the content relevant to students' lives.  Provide opportunities for teachers in all disciplines to become intimately familiar with CCLS and what the CCLS-aligned tasks would look like for our specific population. What is your vision for diverse program offerings that allow students to develop skills, habits, and behaviors to be career and college ready? How are instructional shifts embedded in this vision?  Programming will offer students the opportunities of engaging in college readiness courses such as Advanced Placement in English Literature and Composition, Spanish, and U.S. History.  Peer Group Connection (PGC) will continue teaching students habits and behaviors needed for them to be successful in college Students will participate in internships during the Renewal Hour to teach the college and career skills   All courses will emphasize reading, writing and speaking.  Expand opportunities for students to participate in internships, community service and other work-based learning opportunities through our CBO partnerships.  Our full-time college advisor will assist the school in creating a college and career readiness culture by targeting all events to students 9-12 grade  The continuation of the Peer Enabled Restructured Classrooms in Algebra will help students improve their communication, interpersonal, Mathematics and Science to be successful in college. This program will also increase student collaboration and leadership.  The partnership with Blue Engine will provide BETAs in the Common Core Algebra bilingual and monolingual classes and grade 9 ELA classes.  Renewal Hour will be embedded during the day and a large percentage of school staff has agreed to teach the additional period to provide students with multiple opportunities to engage in diverse course offerings including Mindfulness, Music Production, Debate, Poetry, etc. What do you envision the delivery of instruction to look like so that all students are set up for success?  Instruction will emphasize collaborative work, student-to-student discussion, and tasks that reach DOK levels 3 and 4 and require students to engage in reading, writing and speaking based on texts 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 20    Instruction will be tailored to meet the needs of individual students through the analysis of student work in teacher teams Inclusion of a range of instructional strategies to differentiate instruction for groups and individual students that are aligned to the school's instructional focus and the core beliefs of how students learn best Students will engage with cognitively complex tasks and tasks that are aligned to state assessments How do you envision teachers using multiple entry points to ensure the success of every child? The following will be implemented to provide multiple entry points for students:  Teachers will use our cognitively task matrics to plan tasks for lessons  There will be evidence of at least two versions of the task    Teachers will use benchmark assessment data to determine next steps for students including reading and In co-taught classes, there will be purposeful deployment of adults to support groups of students Lessons will include reading and writing strategies to support groups of students writing supports Inclusion of visuals Strategic grouping Student-to-student discussions  The inclusion of varied texts    Annotation strategies   Use of Judith Hochman Writing Strategies   Performance tasks that are tied to real world situations  Problems with a different degrees of difficulty  Student presentations to demonstrate mastery of standards Inclusion of audio visuals and media through the use of Smart Boards and Google Chrome books that have been installed in every classroom for immediate access What is your vision for the use of a comprehensive assessment strategy (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, and summative) to drive curricular, instructional, and organizational decisions that impact student outcomes?  At the end of the 2018-2019 school year, teachers and coaches will establish benchmarks and benchmark assessments for the 2018-2019 school year.  Assessments including baselines, benchmarks, unit assessments and mock regents will be embedded in the  pacing calendar for all core content subjects. Feedback lessons will be built into pacing calendars for all departments; teachers conduct feedback lessons and provide students opportunities to improve their work  Teacher teams will use the ATLAS protocol for looking at students work and making instructional decisions  DataWise will used by inquiry teams to look at a wide range range of data to implement instructional strategies which will be monitored by the teams.  Development of content-specific writing assessments to be across grade levels and an accompanying common rubric to be used across disciplines.  Administrators will periodically analyze student data such as marking period data, attendance data, Regents scores, ADVANCE data to make instructional and organizational decisions.  Progress reports will be distributed to students before the end of each marking period to increase student ownership and achievement. Please indicate below the specific assessments that you are implementing and their purpose for each grade. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 21  Assessment Name Assessment Type Grades Implemented Purpose All Grades (diagnostic, formative, benchmark, summative) CCLS and regents aligned baseline across all grades and content areas Diagnostic Formative Interim Assessments Benchmark All Grades Mock Regents Formative All Grades Regents Summative All grades Part 3 – Annual Goal To adjust instruction based on students' entry level To determine students levels and determine supports for groups of students To determine adjustment in units of instructions To determine focus (content and skills) for regents prep To identify mastery of standards in core content areas Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the instructional leadership team will conduct 3 rounds of cabinet inquiry around 3c and 3d and use these observations to create 3 cycles of professional development to improve teacher practice which will lead to an increase in regent completion rate by 5% from 27% in 2017/18 to 33% in cohort V and W this school year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal: Which Renewal benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Rigorous Instruction Annual Goal? Regents Completion Rate of 32% 4 Year Graduation Rate of 67% N/A 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 22  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Instructional team and teachers creates pacing calendars that are aligned to CCLS. Benchmarks assessments and feedback lessons are embedded in the pacing calendars for the core subjects areas. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All teachers Regents Completion rate 32% Instructional Team June 2018-September , 2018 Instructional Team including Principal, Assistant Principals, Content coaches, Master Teacher 4 Year Graduation Rate of 67% Meeting with Master Teacher to frame her role in improving instruction. Create a bi weekly schedule for classroom observations, analysis of observation data using the Atlas protocol and making decisions about the supports for groups of teachers and Master Teacher Regents Completion Rate 32% June 2018 Principal and Assistant Principal 4 Year Graduation Rate of 67% All classroom teachers Regents Completion Rate 32% August 2018- June 2019 4 Year Graduation Rate of 67% Instructional Team including principal, assistant principals, DSR, coaches How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Pacing calendar for all core content Identification of benchmark assessments and a schedule for administering the assessments Implementation of pacing calendar assessments feedback to teachers Meeting notes outlining expectations for Master Teacher Weekly meeting with Master teacher Copy of biweekly schedule, tennis charts showing classroom data 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 23  adjust in supervisory stategies Creating criteria checklist/Tennis chart to be used during biweekly classroom visits Classroom teachers, instructional team Regents Completion Rate 32% August 2018- June 2019 Instructional Team including principal, assistant principals, DSR, coaches 4 Year Graduation Rate of 67% 4b – Parent and Family Engagement Feedback given to teachers Copy of task and students work Copy of criteria checklist/Tennis Chart for each round of walk through How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family will be be provided with information about Rigorous Instruction through family orientation, family workshops at the start of the school year by the Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance and Parent Coordinator. Monthly Newsletters will be sent via Kinvolved to family by our CBO partner; this news letter will include updates on curricula and instructional expectations. Throughout the school year, family will have a voice in decision making including implementation and monitoring of Rigorous Instruction through their participation in Monthly SLT meetings. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, lead CBO’s community school budget, etc. Resources used, but not limited, are:  Human resources: Assistant Principals, Office of Renewal School Coaches, Field Support Center Coaches,  Metamorphosis Coach, Master and Peer Collaborative Teachers, Blue Engine BETAs Instructional resources: EngageNY curricula in ELA and Mathematics, New Visions Curricula in Science and Social Studies; daily common planning time, Monday professional development, off-site professional development offered by FSC  Budget: School's and CHCF's budget Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) X Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X X C4E Other X X 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 24  Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By February 2019, the instructional team would have conducted at least 1 round of Cabinet Inquiry around 3c and 3d and use the observations to create at least one cycle of professional development with a goal of improving regents completion rate to 32% in June 2019. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  January Regents exam results Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 5. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths of our school have been identified as follows:  The teachers and support staff are supportive, committed, and dedicated.  The school has effective structures to support socio-emotional growth, such as our PGC, PERC and a 'Champion' mentoring program in grades to provide students with mentoring that supports their socio-emotional needs.  This year the school social work team developed an advisory program to serve the students in grades 9th-12th. Students met with their in small groups once a week. Advisory was a safe place where students came together as a peer group to support each others academic and personal goals as well as future aspirations. It was meant to build student confidence, build their ability to make informed decisions about school and life, as well as the opportunity for students to get to know themselves better. We discussed topics such as: o Bullying o Stress Management o Career Readiness & Exploration o College Readiness  We collaborated with Wheelchairs Against Guns (WAGS) an organization of people who have been disabled due to gun violence in the community. They shared their stories and their learning s with all of our students. Student Government was strengthened this year; the students took initiative and managed projects to strengthen school environment.  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 26   Two of our 9th grade students joined the TAFT Student Council and played critical roles in creating activities and events after school to bring the school community together. They also engaged in serious conversations revolving metal detectors in the school in the wake of the Parkland Shooting.  The school has updated a Ladder of Referral based on the NYC Behavioral Expectations that emphasize progressive discipline.  Our CBO created a paid opportunity for students to become peer tutors after school in the core academic areas.  We strengthened our conflict resolution process this year and one of our social workers began received training for the restorative practices - Tier 2 - Restorative Circles.  Our lead CBO has created several small counseling groups such as Young Women Empowerment group; a group for LGBTQ students and their allies called True Colors; a support group for students that were being bullied; New comers groups for students from Latin American countries and students from African countries to help them acclimate to a new country groups.  The strong relationship we had with our Montefiore School-Based Clinic staff was strengthened school this year. Through the advisory program they provided comprehensive sexual health information a six week curriculum for all the grades.  This year the school has improved the level of communication to the students about events and activities. The school provides: daily PA announcements; fliers; and utilizing student leaders to share the information as well. In the wake of the Parkland shooting all of our teachers took a moment to facilitate a conversation with the students that was prepared by the Social Work team. We then had a moment of silence to honor the victims.   CHCF (CBO) has worked alongside the school to implement the “Every Day Counts” campaigns providing student-informed incentives to improve attendance across grades.  This year we were able to provide additional counseling support through a Bachelor's In Social Work intern and 2 Masters in Social Work interns.  The partnership with the Relationship Abuse Prevention Program (RAPP) Coordinator housed at BHSB from Tuesday to Friday to address and foster healthy teen relationships through the following services: Individual counseling (long-term, short-term, and crisis counseling) o o Group counseling o Classroom workshops o Staff Trainings o Parent Workshops Needs of our school has been identified as follows: There was an overall decrease in the overall positive students response about the supportive environment of the school as per the 2018 Learning Environment Survey. There is the need for our school to reduce the number of incident and related suspensions. We need to provide more education on gang violence to students; parents; and to staff/faculty. We need to provide faculty and staff professional development to support students' social-emotional needs (De-escalation, conflict mediation, helping students regulate their behavior, family crisis techniques, etc.). Student government will be used as a vehicle to determine relevant topics for advisories, to develop and implement a system to track the effectiveness of the advisories, and to make adjustments to the advisories as necessary to meet the needs of all students. Part 2 – Summative Vision for Supportive Environment 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 27  What is your vision for a supportive school environment? How will you in partnership with each CBO and families enact your vision? 1. We want stakeholders to engage in a learning community that fosters a culture of respect and high expectations for all, where stakeholders work collaboratively to promote such vision. 2. The CBO partnership aims to create a positive school culture and a welcoming environment to support students' academic and socio-emotional needs to prepare them for college and careers. 3. The students have the opportunity to have their voice heard through surveys, roundtable conferences with stakeholders, student government, Taft Student Council, bi-weekly meetings with the Principal and the SLT. 4. The school will be more proactive in improving students' social-emotional skills by have school-wide campaigns and assemblies, award ceremonies to reward positive behavior and good attendance, group counseling for targeted students, peer mentoring and peer mediation. 5. The school will expand the partnership with Broome Street Academy to strengthen the 'Champion' program- faculty and staff provide mentoring of students. 6. Social workers and the guidance counselor will work with students individually and in groups to build positive relationships and mentoring of students. The school team will measure social emotional development by reduced anger, anxiety, and aggression from students which lead to a decrease in the number of student suspensions and teacher removals. 7. For the 2018-2019 school year, teachers will continue to participate in professional development activities that will deepen their ability to strength and support social emotional development in the classroom. 8. The Guidance Counselor will continue to provide individual and in class presentations to explain academic expectations and offer support. 9. Student attendance will be monitored weekly through our attendance meeting, counselor and AP outreach. Students with good attendance and improved attendance will be rewarded. LTAs identification will be done and specific actions will be implemented for these students. Students with 70% to 80% attendance will be monitored closely by different 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 28  mentors. Mentors will be trained to support students and will have bi-weekly check-ins and monthly activities to support the student-mentor relationship. 10. We will continue the implementation of PGC in 9th grade and increase the number of mentors in 11th and 12th grade. 11. Expansion of the PERC program . Teacher Assistants Scholars will collaborate with classroom teachers in the development and implementation of lessons to provide support for all students. 12. Continue to provide weekly advisory meetings led by guidance counselors and other staff members to target specific students that might need extra support, especially newly arrived students to the country. 13. Students participate in student volunteer opportunities supporting and creating events for other students/families/community members. 14. Our CBO partner along with the social work team will continue to support restorative justice practices and alternative to suspension programs by implementing restorative justice circles; and groups for young men and young women that are consistently suspended or in detention. 15. Teachers will receive additional Professional Development opportunities to become mediators and to learn practical de-escalation skills in their classrooms. 16. Grade specific orientations in the beginning of the year will be held each semester. 17. Our CBO partner will continue to support the creation of a stipend peer tutoring program to support 2 students per core class. Tutoring will be offered 4 times a week. 18. The Student Activities Committee will continue to incorporate youth voice and will continue to create and distribute the Student Newsletter on a monthly basis. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 29 Who are your CBO partners? How will each CBO sustain and support the social-emotional and academic growth of your students? CBO Partner Committee for Hispanic Children and Families Center for Supportive Schools Peer Enabled Restructured Classroom Broome Street Academy New Settlement Apartment’s Student Success Center STEPS to End Family Violence a program with the Edwin Gould Services for Children and Families. Family engagement; socio-emotional supports; college and career readiness; restorative justice i.e. conflict mediation CBO Focus Peer Group Connection Several earth science, algebra, ELA and geometry classes Champion mentoring program College Readiness; Scholarship Support; Youth Leadership; Parent Engagement Relationship Abuse Prevention Program (RAPP) will be housed at BHSB from Tuesday to Friday to address and foster healthy teen relationships through the following services: - Individual Counseling (long-term; short-term; and crisis counseling.) -Group Counseling -Classroom workshops -Staff Trainings -Parent Outreach How will you in partnership with your CBO will create a supportive environment and engagement for your students’ families?  Weekly meetings with the CSD and the DSR to provide update on school-wide initiatives and specific CBO led programs  Collaborate on strengthening of Restorative Practices  Monitor the success of the implementation of Restorative Practices through the use of data from the office school climate and culture  Continue implementing strategies to increase family engagement especially programs to educate families on topics such as depression, nutrition, bullying, college and career readiness, financial aid, taxation, etc  Ensure that the CSD is a part of planning meetings; the attendance team meetings; programming team meetings; School Leadership Team Meetings; Recruitment Team Meetings; Student Activities Committee; and other relevant committees  Ensure that the Principal and/or an Administrator is a part of the Community School Team  Work collaboratively to survey students/parents about the needs they have and the best way to improve our school environment  Ensure that the school staff/faculty embraces the Community School Initiative model  Ensure that CBO and the school is utilizing data to identify, develop, and implement effective strategies to support academic growth and overall student well-being 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 30   Utilize the Renewal school city partnerships to implement whole-school strategies for well-being such as vision screening for the students and immigration clinics for support to the student/families  The CBO and BHSB will split the cost for the Music Production Recording Program.  The CBO and BHSB administrative team will work together to develop, implement, and evaluate a Peer2Peer Tutoring program.  Principal and/or administrative team will play a key role in the planning and execution of the Community School Forum  Create a web page for the school and promote the schools’ Face Book page.  The CBO will work with the school to offer home visits to better engage families at the school and to conduct needs assessments.  The school in collaboration with the CBO will create a monthly assemblies for the students including a pep rally each semester.  Provide additional extracurricular activities and opportunities for students during after school programs. Clubs  and organizations include, work readiness, music, dance, art, anime, basketball, video game, etc. In collaboration with the The Committee for Hispanic Children and Families, the Opening Doors to the Future program continue and will add a young womens cohort to expand program elements.  CHCF will added professional development for parents in career readiness by providing workshops in resume development. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Supportive Environment. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019 staff will be trained in and implement progressive discipline strategies to address student behavior and to provide a safe and student friendly school environment. As evidenced by:  A 5% increase in the percentage of positive responses in the Supportive Environment component in the School Survey as compared to the 2017-2018 results.  A 5% decrease in the number of disciplinary incidents submitted in OORS as compared to the 2017-2018 data.  An overall decrease of at least 4% of chronically absent students in the 2018-2019 school year. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Supportive Environment Annual Goal? Attendance Rate of at least 84% Regents Completion Rate 32.0% Principal Suspensions will be reduced by 3% 4-Year Graduation Rate 67% 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 31  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. In collaboration with administration, teachers, support staff, students, and CBOs, the school will review current systems and protocols for discipline, referrals of students for socio-emotional supports, academic interventions, restorative practices, and student rewards and revise accordingly. Professional development activity on school safety and a supportive environment that outlines the process and includes the appropriate materials. Continue the mentorship programs for the promotion of students' socio-emotional well-being. Expand the Youth Empowerment Program to include more students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Students Attendance Rate of at least 84% September 2018- School Administrators How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) -Decrease in serious incidents June 2019 Teachers, Support Staff, CBOs, Students, Parents 4-Year Graduation Rate 67% College Career Readiness 20% -Increase of the use of peer mediation -Increase in the number of referrals through the Pupil Personnel Team -Increase -Decrease in serious incidents -Increase of the use of peer mediation -Decrease in serious incidents All Teachers Principal Suspensions will be reduced by 3% September 2018 School Administrators 12th grade and 9th grade students Students Attendance Rate of at least 84% September 2018- School Administrators PGC teacher; June 2019 Principal Suspensions will be reduced by 3% Attendance Rate of at least 84% Broom Street Academy staff; School Social Workers -Increase in attendance September 2018-June 2019 School administrators, CBO -Decrease in serious incidents 32  4-Year Graduation Rate 67% Principal Suspensions will be reduced by 3% Regents Completion Rate 32.0% School administrators, CBO, Staff/Faculty, Montefiore School-Based Clinic Collaborate with the Montefiore Clinic on the implementation of programs to support students socio-emotional and health needs Students Attendance Rate of at least 84% n/a 4-Year Graduation Rate 67% Principal Suspensions will be reduced by 3% College Career Readiness 20% Students Attendance Rate of at least 84% October 2018-June 2019 School Administrators, Staff/Faculty, CBOs; School Social Workers 4-Year Graduation Rate 67% Implement additional support groups and clubs based on student survey and expand Opening Doors and Bienvenidos programs All students will an receive Advisory period -Increase of the use of peer mediation -Increase in the number of referrals through the Pupil Personnel Team -Increase in attendance -Decrease in serious incidents -Increase of the use of peer mediation -Increase in the number of referrals through the Pupil Personnel Team -Increase in attendance -Decrease in serious incidents -Increase of the use of peer mediation 2018-19 RSCEP-PF -Increase in the number of 33 referrals through the Pupil Personnel Team -Increase in attendance September 2018-June 2019 School Administrators, Teachers, CBOs -Decrease in serious incidents Students Develop additional college and career readiness activities to promote high expectations for all students Principal Suspensions will be reduced by 3% College Career Readiness 20% Attendance Rate of at least 84% 4-Year Graduation Rate 67% Principal Suspensions will be reduced by 3% College Career Readiness 20% -Increase of the use of peer mediation -Increase in the number of referrals through the Pupil Personnel Team -Increase in attendance -Increase the attendance rate of the school --Increase the knowledge of school offerings --Increase the students and parents/caregivers buy-in in the school. Create a web page for the school and promote the schools’ Face Book page. n/a Students, Parents, Extended Community, Potential Partners, Potential New Students October 2018-June 2019 School Administrators, Staff/Faculty, CBOs 4b – Parent and Family Engagement 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 34  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be engaged during the following: School Leadership Team meetings (monthly) Family Night in the Fall    Community School Forum in the Spring  Monthly workshops  Communications using KinVo Staff in charge will be Parent Coordinator and School Social Workers. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Human Resources: Principal, Assistant Principals, Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers, social worker, guidance counselors, CBOs, and Montefiore School-Based Clinic. Instructional Resources: Curricula supporting socio-emotional education; professional development of Life Crisis Space Intervention; Restorative Practices, De-escalation, conflict mediation Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Mid-Year Benchmarks:  By February 2019, the number of Principal suspensions will decrease by 2% as compared to February 2018 as measured by OORS data.  By February 2019, overall student attendance will have increased by 1% as compared to the 2017-2018 overall attendance rate as measured by ATS official attendance data.  By February 2019 all staff will have participated in a minimum of 3 professional learning sessions on effectively addressing student's social emotional needs and/or progressive discipline practices as evidenced by agendas and sign-in sheets from professional learning sessions. Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 35   Monthly analysis of OORS reports at the PPT meeting  Monitoring of student attendance weekly at the attendance meeting  Agendas and attendance sheets for professional learning sessions. Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 36  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed X 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths of our school have been identified as follows:  There are effective structures in place for teachers to collaborate on the development of lesson plans, unit map and curriculum maps- common planning time. Teacher teams meets four times every week; two days are dedicated for collaborating around designing curriculum and instruction and the two remaining days are used for teachers to conduct inquiry work.  The school was rated proficient in the area of 'Collaborative Teachers' on the most recent Quality Review.  Teachers participate in the Data Wise inquiry process to identify learner centred problem, problem of practice and decide on researched based strategies to improve teaching and learning.  The school has created several structures for distributive leadership and teacher collaboration such as the creation of lead teachers in departments. Department leads are members on the Instructional Leadership Team (ILT) ; the instructional leadership team meets weekly to plan, monitor, and adjust instructional decisions.  Master Teacher provides support to teachers through individualized and small group coaching.  Teachers participate in inquiry team meetings to analyze student work and develop instructional strategies aligned to those goals. Needs of our school has been identified as follows: The school's 2018 IIT report highlights the need for "The school leader and assistant principal should monitor co-taught classrooms to ensure that instructional staff are being deployed strategically and effectively so that both teachers are sharing the responsibility for implementing a deliberate plan which outlines each teacher’s role in increasing learning for all groups of students in the classroom." 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 37  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Collaborative Teachers What is your vision for collaborative teaching?  Teachers will continue to engage in structured professional collaborations in teams during daily common planning and collaborate with colleagues on the development of lesson planning, curriculum alignment and creation of assessments.  Teachers will continue to collaborate in teams via the inquiry process to identify learner centered problem and  problem of practice and implement instructional strategies to improve student outcome. Instructional Leadership Team will meet weekly to monitor and make decisions about instructional next steps for school improvement.  Master Teachers will participate in weekly Cabinet meetings with Principal and Assistant Principals to develop action plans for professional development, assess the implementation of pedagogical strategies and discuss other school-wide initiatives  Content Coaches will continue supporting teachers during common planning to strengthen pedagogy and curriculum alignment. How do you envision collaboration amongst your School Instructional Cabinet to improve teacher practices and student learning?  Weekly Cabinet Meetings focusing on best practices and research on teacher pedagogy  Cabinet use biweekly walk through data to monitor effectiveness of instructional practices.  Instructional Leadership Team will meet weekly to monitor and make decisions about instructional next steps for school improvement.  Bi-weekly Cabinet Inquiry meetings to discuss targeted teachers and specific interventions to address areas of growth.  Develop differentiated professional development plan for teachers depending on their needs. Obtain input from teachers on this plan  Develop systems to identify teacher goals based on observations and student work through the collaboration with teachers  Conduct cycle of Instructional Rounds with all teachers to help norm and calibrate the Danielson's rubric How do you envision collaboration within teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning?  Department Inquiry teams where teacher teams will analyze student work using an established protocol.  Teachers participate in weekly inquiry process to identify learner centred problem, problem of practice and decide on researched based strategies to improve teaching and learning.  Daily common planning meetings will provide teachers the opportunity to work with colleagues, Content Coaches on curriculum alignment  Master Teachers will support teacher development, use her classrooms for inter-visitations, conduct peer observations and one-on-one coaching. How do you envision collaboration across teacher teams to improve teacher practices and student learning? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 38   Teacher teams will participate in cycles of inter-visitations and peer observations across teams. Staff will meet monthly to discuss social emotional supports provided to student 'champions'.   Teachers will facilitate professional development for their colleagues. What data will teachers and the School Instructional Cabinet regularly review to ensure that they are reflecting upon their teaching practices and meeting individual student learning needs? What is the intent for reviewing each piece of data? (ex. Teachers will regularly review student IEPs when developing lessons in order to ensure that tasks are appropriately scaffolded.) Data Reviewed Bi-Weekly walk through data To monitor implementation of instructional strategies and determine next steps Intent ADVANCE Reports To determine areas of strength, focus and professional development Student Work from inquiry teams and observations Feedback forms from inter-visitations Lesson plans Part 3 – Annual Goal To identify impact of instructional strategy, plan for professional development, create individualized PD plan for teachers, identify best practices and showcase those Assess the impact of inter-visitation and next steps as reflected by teachers Assess alignment to the mandated curricula, the rigor of task, elements in 1e and identify professional development and other next steps Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, 100% of core content teachers will participate in at least 2 rounds of Data Wise inquiry that will result in implementation of department wide strategies and an increase of 5% in Math passed by year 2 and a 5% increase in ELA passed by year 3. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Collaborative Teachers Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Collaborative Teaching Annual Goal? Framework: Collaborative Teachers n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 39  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Departments will develop common assessment tasks and rubric. Teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers Teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers June 2018- Coaches May 2019 Teacher leaders Administration Sept. 2018- School Administration May 2019 Coaches, Teachers, How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Agenda and notes from planning meeting, Documented common assessments Student work samples, Agenda from inquiry meetings, Meeting with team leaders Inter-visitation schedule, coaching log, PD Agenda Teachers will meet weekly to engage in the inquiry process. Teacher teams will use the Data Wise protocol for inquiry team meetings. Master teachers will take on leadership roles and provide: Coaching, mentoring, plan inter-visitations, co-plan and co-facilitate Professional Learning sessions Admin and teachers will participate in PD on the use of data and the inquiry process Teachers Framework: Collaborative Teachers Sept. 2018- School Administrator, Master Teacher May 2019 September 2018- May 2019 Teachers Administration Framework: Collaborative Teachers Administrators, Coaches ADVANCE Data Walk through data Scholarship Data 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 40  4b – Parent and Family Engagement Regents Data Student Work How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school, in collaboration with our CBO, will engage families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers through the following efforts-  Beginning September 2018, CBO will send home monthly newsletter informing families of events including common assessments dates and inquiry work done with assessment data  By October 2018, parents will participate in cycles of meetings/workshops with school leaders and teachers; parents will receive information about the work of teacher teams and the instructional decisions that are and will be made based on the work of teacher teams and how they can support their children at home.  By October 2018, the Parent Coordinator in collaboration with the CBO will host the first of a series of parent workshop to discuss ways that families can support their children at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will be used to achieve this annual goal:  All teachers will have the same common planning time  The personnel will include administrators, Coaches, and Teacher.  Per session will be used to allow for additional time for teacher teams to grade and analyze students work. Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Mid-point benchmark: The mid-point benchmark is based on the fact that some students will take regents exams in January 2018. By February 2018, 100% of core departments would have completed at least 1 round of Data Wise inquiry which will result in at least a 2% increase in Math passed by year 2 and a 2% increase in ELA passed by year 3. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 41  Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Formative assessment data from regents aligned common assessments Student work samples    Observation data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (RSCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the RSCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths:  The school was rated proficient in the following indicators of the 2018 Quality Review conducted in May: 1.1 Curriculum, 1.3 Resource Allocation, 1.4 Learning Environment, 3.1 Goal Setting, 3.4 High Expectations, 4.1 Teacher Feedback, 4.2 Teacher Teams, and 5.1 Monitoring and Revising. School decisions were consistently based on the analysis of data (scholarship, Regents, attendance and other types of data) and were shared with the entire school staff to increase transparency.   Administrators monitored the implementation of Engage in ELA and Mathematics. Teacher implemented these curricula with fidelity across grade levels.  Professional Development plan was purposeful and focused on supporting teachers in areas aligned to the instructional focus and on socio-emotional supports. Needs: One of the IIT Recommendations from 2018 is for "The school leader should collaborate with the assistant principal and master teachers to create a calendar for conducting targeted daily walkthroughs, both individually and together, to monitor the quality of instruction in all classes. The purpose of the walkthroughs is to ensure that teachers are meeting the leaders’ expectations in the areas where they have been provided with professional development." 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 43  Part 2 – Summative Vision for Effective School Leadership What is your vision for effective school leadership at your school?  Weekly Instructional Cabinet meetings will be implemented and will include the following members: Principal, Assistant Principals, department lead teachers, Community School Director, College Advisor, Guidance Counselor and Social Workers. The purpose of the instructional Cabinet will be to create a coherent professional development plan aligned to the district priorities, instructional focus, and vision of the school, review multiple data points to assess progress of school towards meeting renewal and receivership benchmarks and RSCEP goals, review systems for socio-emotional supports for students, and efficacy of school partnerships with outside organizations.  The Principal will meet weekly with the Community School Director to review the process of the implementation of CBO initiatives and supports; review student calendars; and parental engagement activities; plan college trips; review the support programs offered by CHCF; review the mental health support programs through CHCF; discuss budgetary needs; identify/review student interventions; discuss staff support/staff concerns/morale; discuss whole school events.  The Community School Director will co-facilitate the attendance team meeting; attend teachers' professional development; be a member of the instructional cabinet; participate on the School Leadership Team; participate in the recruitment committee; participate in the Pupil Personnel Team and student activities committee.  To ensure that teachers, guidance counselors, and assistant principals continue to improve, the principal will conduct formal and informal observations, learning walks, and provide opportunities for professional learning, engage in data-driven decision-making, strengthen protocols for looking at student work, align curriculum to the CCLS  Teachers will participate in daily common planning five days a week. During these meetings teachers will  analyze student work, conduct inter-visitations, peer observations, lesson planning, etc. Leadership shares the vision for the school and staff/faculty are able to work together to adjust the vision as needed. Leadership will be open to hearing ideas from all staff/faculty. On which aspects of your own leadership do you plan to focus for the upcoming school year?  Teacher pedagogy and systems for improvement.  Developing systems to increase communication with staff/faculty and families.   Working with teacher leaders to move the school vision.  Continue building trusting relationships with members of the school community. Strengthen structures for the analysis of data and develop systems for monitoring the impact of action plans. What is your vision for ensuring that everyone in your schools has a normed and shared understanding of the school’s vision, mission, and instructional focus?  Provide a rationale for the instructional focus  Implement suggestions that were given at the Community School Forums and communicate to parents via parent workshops, Kinvolved, parent newsletter, etc. the changes that are taking place  Align all professional development, formal and informal observations to the instructional focus and district priorities  Ensure the instructional focus is included in all agenda materials; is posted around the school; and is reflected on the website. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 44  Ensure that the mission and vision are visible in the school. What is your vision for developing differentiated leadership throughout your school? How will you utilize teacher leaders to build broad capacity within your school?  Master and Peer Collaborative teachers will help build capacity of other teachers.  Individualized professional development plan will be implemented by Administrators to support teachers rated "developing." Staff/faculty will attend off-site professional development which they will then share with their colleagues. Staff/faculty will take lead on different committees and have opportunities to share back their work. Staff/faculty will have time to share best practices for their particular department and/or grade assignment.    How will the leader foster collaborative school governance processes, and ensure full family participation together with other stakeholders?  Continue providing teachers opportunities to participate in shared decision making and being transparent with  decisions that are made by school leadership. Leverage the Peer Collaborative Teachers and Department Lead teachers to provide professional development opportunities for the rest of the teachers.  Create structures for students to have a voice in the decision-making by implementing an Advisory program, town halls, students participating in the Student Activities Committee, and continuing to have student government. Increase communication with families through parent meetings, workshops, consistent use of SKEDULA, Kinvolved, and Bridg-It.  How often will the school leader conduct observations? How quickly will school leader share actionable feedback with teachers? How will school leader ensure accuracy and provide support to teachers based on observation feedback? Frequency Feedback Turnaround Accuracy Weekly formal, informal or non-evaluativeclassroom observations 2-3 days Collaborate with TDECto calibrate and norm the DanielsonFramework Teachers will be supported by Principal, Assistant Principals, Renewal Coaches, FSCCoaches, and Model and Collaborative Teachers What kind of evidence based systems would a school leader put in place to ensure that the school and individuals continues to improve? What kind of supports? Who would he/she collaborate with? Evidence-Based System Support(s) Collaborator(s) Student work in inquiry teams Principal, Assistant Principal, Coaches, Model and PCT teachers, DSR Teachers, administrators ADVANCE data Principal, Assistant Principals, Coaches, Model and PCT teachers, DSR Administrators, model and PCT teachers Lesson plans, curriculum maps and units Renewal Coaches, Principal, Assistant Principals, Model and PCT teachers All teachers and administrators 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 45  How will you organize student and teacher programs to ensure students’ needs are met? Fiscal capital? Students will be programmed based credit and/or Regents raps.   Teachers will be programmed based on the needs of the schools and where they can make the greatest impact.  Programming needs of ELLs and SWDs will be taken into consideration in order to determine the number of teachers needed. Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the Principal, Assistant Principal and department leads will facilitate at least 2 cycles of Data Wise and will monitor implementation of chosen strategies through professional development and observation. This will result in at least a 5% increase in June Regents results from the previous year in each of the 4 main content areas. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Effective School Leadership Annual Goal?   Framework for Great Schools: Rigorous Instruction Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 46  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) Weekly Instructional Cabinet Meetings All teachers Framework for Great Schools: Rigorous Instruction Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers Cycles of observation All teachers Framework for Great Schools: Rigorous Instruction Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Teacher Leaders, Guidance Counselor, Social Workers, Community School Director Increase in teachers scoring effective in 3b, 3c, and 3d September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Master and Peer Collaborative Teachers Increase in teachers scoring effective in 3b, 3c, and 3d Increase in teachers scoring effective in 3b, 3c, and 3d Professional Development on Mondays aligned to the instructional focus and district priorities All Staff Framework for Great Schools: Rigorous Instruction September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, Master and Peer Collaborative Teachers ORS Coaches Framework for Great Schools: Collaborative Teachers n/a n/a n/a n/a 4b – Parent and Family Engagement FSC Coaches and support personnel Broome Street Academy partners n/a n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 47  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Beginning September 2018 a monthly newsletter will be sent home informing families of events  School leaders will use kinvolved to communicate with families; school leaders will monitor teachers' use of this system to communicate with families and provide weekly feedback to staff.  By October 2018, parents will participate in SLT meetings/workshops  By November 2018, the Parent Coordinator in collaboration with the CBO will host the first of a series of parent workshop to discuss ways that families can support their children at home. Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will be used: Instructional Cabinet   ORS and FSC Coaches  Broome Street Academy Partners  Title I SWP and Tax Levy funding to fund after school professional development activities and conferences Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Mid-Point Benchmarks:  By January 2018, at least one cycle of Data Wise inquiry will be completed  By the end of January 2018, 60% of the required observations for each teacher will be completed Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  ADVANCE observation reports  Informal classroom visits Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 48  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Summative Vision, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: SOP(s) Addressed 1. Summarize your school’s strengths relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. 2. Summarize your school’s needs relative to this element of the Framework for Great Schools and the SOPs selected above. Identify the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this section. 3. 4. What data trends and sources were analyzed, e.g. NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, Central-led Review, Quality Review and/or Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) Review? Strengths:   In collaboration with our CBO, we have created a range of activities to engage families beyond our Parent-Teacher Conferences, i.e. Action NYC Immigration Clinics, Community School Forums, school trips that include families Student activities such as honor roll, perfect attendance and PGC Night have provided a venue for parents/guardians to join the school community. School Principal has an open door policy to the students and parents  The location of the Parent Coordinator is accessible to parents   Teacher-led initiatives that support socio-emotional needs of students, such as Peer Group Connections  Teacher-led programs that promote students as teachers such as TAS Students are actively involved as volunteers for events and activities   Our lead CBO has created ongoing partnerships with multiple local vendors in the community whose business  Our lead CBO has developed effective partnerships with the multiple CBO’s in the school increasing their visibility and that of the School Based Health Center – Montefiore  The creation of an alumni association starting with the 1st graduating class of BHSB, the class of 2006 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 49  Areas of Need:  More bilingual staff that are proficient in verbal and written Spanish  A space that serves as a parent/family receiving space Increased communication with families and students   Ways to visually highlight the multiple programs and activities in the school  More opportunities for student-informed after school programs Part 2 – Summative Vision for Strong Family and Community Ties What is your vision for having strong family and community ties at your school?  The CBO will work collaboratively with the other two community schools in the building to provide more of a holistic parent/family engagement approach.  Through our Virtual Enterprise Program (VE) BHSB has established some connections with community based organizations where our students have greatly benefited from paid internships.  We have reactivated the Advisory Board that will support our Virtual Enterprise Program, the asks of the board are to: facilitate career days o provide continued guidance and direction for our programs o o explore current employment opportunities for our graduates o o o o design ways to engage and celebrate students in our community o create on going networking opportunities between your company/store/agency and our school identify internship opportunities for current students teach skills needed in today’s workforce identify resources that would be helpful for our students and parents  Through the CHCF’s Opening Doors to the Future Internship program which supports the Virtual Enterprises’ state certification, CHCF has created over 10 partnerships in the community that provide internships both locally and in Manhattan.  Partner with local vendors and corporations to provide training program to parents of students that are on track as an incentive.  Create a physical education class – possibly yoga – for parents and encourage staff/faculty participation.  The school leader will engage parents in workshops to become more involved in the academic and workplace competencies needed for students to be successful.  Parents will be invited to monthly parent involvement days that will address the following topics (just to name a few): ● How to read a transcript and how credits are accumulated annually ● What is my child’s report card telling me ● What cohort is my child in and what does it mean ● Understand the graduation requirements based on my child’s cohort ● Awareness of the Extended Learning Time classes being offered ● What does credit recovery look like and why would my child attend 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 50  ● Understanding the Common Core ● What does summer school look like and why would my child attend ● Workshops on how to use Skedula, Kinvolved, and Bridg-It and how can these tools can help parents with their child’s success and communicate frequently with the school ● How does the school’s Google Domain help parents communicate with teacher  Adult education classes will instill skills and confidence parents need to become educators of their own children and active members of the community. These classes will help parents improve their education and earning potential. They will also provide the added value of improved attitudes about their children's education and expectations. Through the Community School Forum and surveys administered throughout the year, parents have identified the following as courses/workshops that can be offered to our families as helpful: o English as a Second Language o Civics Classes in preparation for US Citizenship o Filing Taxes o Applying for College/Applying for Financial Aid o Computer technology classes  CHCF will work with community partners to support training of parents as advocates in education; create parent-friendly ways of communicating protocols and procedures; create ways to strengthen communication with parents.  Teachers will conduct outreach to parents and enter it in SKEDULA. Pupil Path tutorial sessions will continue to be offered in the school computer lad during Parent-Teacher Conferences and other events.  Through events such as the Community School Forum, parents will be invited to be problem-solvers in the challenges the school is facing.  Parents will be connected with a Parent Coordinator that speaks their language.  Working as a campus, the CBO will identify a space that will be the Family Resource Room, which parents will design.  Parents will be encouraged to join the Parent Association, the School Leadership Team, and the Community School Team and to develop and serve as volunteers in all school activities (for trips/activities).  As a result of the community school forum identified needs: A partnership has been forged with ActionNYC to provide immigration clinics in the building for the entire day on multiple days for the entire school year.  Academic Open Houses addressing students who failed one or more course will be helped after the end of each marking period during the evenings and on Saturdays.  The school will utilize the Translation Unit Services to provide interpretation services to all families.  A monthly newsletter will be mailed to all families to communicate important school events and dates.  To effectively engage parents and community resources as partners in the school, our CBO will work collaboratively with the school staff through the School Leadership Team, the Community School Team, and the Parent Association to create school-wide events such as “Family Nights”, health fairs, resource fairs, and college fairs that will be open to the entire school community. Parents will play a lead role in planning and executing the event.  The CBO will support the school in identifying ways to positively communicate with parents when students are doing well, shifting the imbalance of phone calls to the parent. Within the Community School model, how will families be welcomed into the school and made a part of the school community? What support will administrators, teachers, school staff and school safety officers be given to help create a welcoming environment? Will there be a dedicated space for families in the school? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 51  A campus-wide Family Welcome Center will be created to receive parents and guardians when they visit school.  The Parent Coordinator will speak to parents/guardians in Spanish if needed since most of our parents are Spanish speaking  Ensure that the Family Welcome Center have pamphlets about resources in the community and in the school.  Staff/faculty along with administration will support each other to make sure that translation services are provided. The Translation Unit will be used as resource as needed.  All school mailings will be in English and Spanish (primary language at the school). There will be other languages  utilized as long as the translation if provided by Central. Families will be invited to school events such as awards ceremonies, student assemblies, talent shows, workshops and other events that celebrate the school community.  Parents have asked for support with job readiness, resume writing, and job search processes, the CBO will work to fulfill this ask.  The Community School Team will provide more opportunities for parents/students/community folks to provide feedback to the school through mini-forums or through focus groups.  Banners will be placed around the school welcoming families in to the building.  The main office will become a receiving space where staff will be pleasant, courteous, and helpful to families. The Parent Coordinator is housed in this space.  Maintain an open door policy. How will the school identify and develop families to take leadership roles in school decision making/school governance structures?  The CBO and the school will collaborate in identifying families that can take leadership role  The Parent Coordinator will support these families as they participate in the school community.  As families volunteer in different school activities, we will be able to assess their level of readiness and willingness to take greater leadership roles within the school community.  Parents will be trained on leadership roles they can have in the school.  At every parent/family event, surveys will be administered to understand the level of commitment that parents are ready to assume at the school.  Approaching parents from a strengths-based perspective, schools staff/faculty will help parents identify strengths they have in supporting their child through the high school years. How will the school engage the community and families? How will they ensure that teachers are able to learn from families about the children being taught?  The school will engage community and families through the work of the CBO who will: o Plan a range of events to increase parental engagement; o Enhance parental awareness of college and career; o Provide ESL classes; o Collaborate with community partners to provide parents/guardians with information such as financial literacy; tenant rights; computer classes; etc.  Teachers will have periodic meetings with families to review what is being taught in the classroom.  The family night in the fall and spring will be used as a time for parents to enter the space and learn about the curriculum being implemented in the school by grade team.  Partner corporate and local vendors and corporations to provide job training for parents whose students are on track.  Partner with the School Health Vision Program to provide vision screening to provide whole school screenings.  Partner with the free dental screening program to provide whole school dental screenings.  Partner with ActionNYC to provide whole school immigration clinics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 52  Partner with city agencies that may be servicing our students, i.s. Administration for Children Services and the Human Resource Administration.  Partner with the local Precinct 46’s Community Affairs Officer to strengthen the relationship between the school community and the police department. What types of supports does the school provide to families to encourage them to take an active role in what their child is learning? Type of Support Rationale -Monthly PA/SLT/CST Meetings that take place on the same evening. -In this fashion parents only have to attend one evening to limit the frequent visits to the school. -Child Care is provided for some of the events that require -Parents are better able to focus on the material or items being discussed if their child is safely engaged in their own activity. -Metro Cards for parents' transportation -Translation services for families, including translated documents. -Teachers have regular check-in time and opportunity with parents. Orientation by grade for the parents. If parents do not have means to travel to the school we ensure their participation by providing a metro card. In order to ensure parents have access to language they need to understand all material being provided and ideas being discussed. Ensure parents know the student’s teacher. -Ensure parents are familiar with grade level expectations for their student. Sessions to enroll parents on to pupil path, Kinvolved, and Brig-It Ensure parents have access to the databases that track student grades. -Information tables for the multiple service providers in the community at any event involving families. Referrals to mental health services. Ensure parents have equitable access to resources. -Ensure parents know who outside of the building can support the socio-emotional health of their family. -Parent surveys and questionnaires -Capture the parents’ voice to shape programming. How do families partner with the school and CBO to support student success? Will there be dedicated space for families? Family partnerships with school: Through phone calls; daily check-ins; PA and SLT meetings; community partnerships that provide education; evening programming and Saturday programming; and open door policy Family partnerships with CBO: Through phone calls; daily check-ins; CST meetings; and open door policy, volunteer opportunities; leadership development opportunities; recognition events; open door policy; through community partnerships to support the needs of the family; staff that speaks their language Is there dedicated space for these partnerships? A campus wide family resource room will be created. What is your vision for the role the school will take in providing access adult education classes within the community? 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 53  The school will work with the CBO to develop partnerships with folks that can teach the multiple education classes parents identified they wanted. The classes will be offered late evening and/or Saturdays. What data and student progress feedback loops will be present at the school to ensure that families knowledgeable of their children’s scholastic success?  Progress Reports  Report Cards  Regents results   Utilization of SKEDULA, Kinvolved, and Brig-It  Data Sorter Student attendance Part 3 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools – Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be consistent with the expectations in part 2, responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. By June 2019, the school will develop a more collaborative partnership with families that will result in an increase of 5% in positive responses on the School Learning Survey in the area of Strong Family and Community Ties. Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Strong Family and Community Ties Annual Goal? Implement Community School Model School Survey Safety result will be at least 33 n/a 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 54  Part 4 – Action Plan Key Initiatives: Concisely indicate the key initiatives (up to five) that your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Which Benchmark(s) indicated above does this initiative target? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) How will you assess the interim progress of the initiative?(ex. decrease in serious incidents, increase in students participating Big Sibs program) All parents Implement Community School Model Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Principal, CBO Staff, Parent Coordinator, CSD, PA Team, SLT, CST -An increase in the presence of families The CBO will conduct a needs assessment to identify a range of activities that will promote parental involvement and increased awareness in high expectations for their children. The CBO in collaboration with school personnel will develop a plan for increasing communication with parents/guardians and engaging them in their children's educations School Survey Safety result will be at least 33 Parents/ Guardians Implement Community School Model Sept. 2018 - June 2019 School Survey Safety result will be at least 33 Principal, CBO Staff, Parent Coordinator, CSD, PA Team, SLT, CST, staff/faculty, community partners An increase in the number of parents that are using Skedula, Kinvolved, and Bridg-It to communicate directly with the school An increase in the number of parents that attend school events An increase in the number of parents that attend school events The CBO will offer workshops and celebratory events for parents/guardians Parents/ Guardians Implement Community School Model Sept. 2018 - June 2019 School Survey Safety result will be at least 33 Principal, CBO Staff, Parent Coordinator, CSD, PA Team, SLT, CST, staff/faculty, Community partners 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 55  Part 5 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The following resources will be needed: Lead CBO Staff   CSD  Parent Coordinator  Parents/Guardians/Caregivers  Community Resources School Administration  SLT/PA/CST  Students   Building Permits    Translation Services Space Staff/Faculty Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title I TA X Title III X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.  By February 2018, 60% of the parents/guardians have been contacted by the school on a regular basis  By February 2018, 25% of the parents participate in the Parent-Teacher Conference and the Family Night  By February 2018, a minimum of 4 workshops/events were held for families Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Attendance to Parent-Teacher Conferences and Family Nights  Attendance to Academic Open Houses and informal meetings with Administrators and teachers  Reports from Skedula, Kinvolved, and Bridg-It to track utilization by parents of these platforms to track their children's progress and communicate with the school Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 56  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environments, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Goals for ELT should align to the Renewal Benchmarks. How will the school will ensure that all students’ individual needs are served during the Renewal ELT and how the school’s vision for ELT will impact both academic achievement and social emotional growth? Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will participate in the Renewal Hour to address credit gaps, Regents preparation or provide opportunities for college and career readiness and enrichment opportunities that will lead to an increase in graduation by 3%. Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory Renewal ELT – Describe what accountability structures the school will employ to ensure participation of all students, including special populations, will participate fully in Renewal ELT. Additional ELT - If there is a voluntary ELT program in addition to the compulsory Renewal ELT, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. N/A Part 3 – ELT Program Description Target Population: The ELT program for a Renewal School will be offered to all students in the school. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program: How will the school integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging? How will CBO staff and the school’s teachers be integrated to provide a seamless learning day?  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduces risk for retention or drop out, and increases the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  What new content areas and opportunities will be offered to students? How will the school ensure all IEP and language mandates are met during ELT?  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 57   How will community educators receive professional development? Are there plans to provide joint PD to school faculty and community partner staff?  What content will be led by pedagogical staff and what content will be led by CBO partners?  How will the school best utilize CBO partners to impact student achievement?  How will effective outreach be conducted to families?  How will programming be made easily accessible to students and families in order to encourage participation?  Renewal Hour classes will be embedded in students' daily programs. Students will receive one additional period of instruction.  Renewal hour courses will be taught by teachers and outside providers through our Community School Organization (CHCF). Enrichment courses, identified through student surveys and the community school forum, will include but will not be limited to: o Music Production o Career and Financial Planning o Advanced Placement Courses o Poetry o Personal Fitness and Weight Training  Students will be participating in courses to address credit gaps and Regents preparation. Teachers will be responsible for providing students with rigorous instruction and preparing them for Regents exam where applicable. Students who are on track will participate in enrichment electives.   Guidance Counselor will be responsible for monitoring students' attendance, providing social-emotional and   academic support, and parent outreach. Individual and group counseling will be provided for students as needed. School leaders will collect data quarterly to monitor and ensure that strategic decisions are being made and effective action plans are created and implemented to increase student outcomes.  The CBO, Parent Coordinator and School Aides will assist in parent outreach for all students.  After School Extra Curricular Activities: The school leader will work in conjunction with CHCF and teachers to coordinate after school programs.  Professional development will be offered on Mondays to staff/faculty.  Academic Intervention courses will be provided to students based on their learning needs. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 1. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. How will the school assess the impact of ELT on individual student achievement and social emotional development? 2. 3. Key Personnel:  Classroom teachers will be in charge of rigorous instruction   School administration and CSD will oversee the data metrics of the Renewal Hour component School Support Staff 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 58  Renewal Hour:  Course offerings will be provided by BHSB teachers and partner organizations.  Enrichment courses identified through student surveys and the community school forum will include but will not be limited to o Music Production o Career and Financial Planning o Advanced Placement Courses o Poetry o Personal Fitness and Weight Training Evaluation:  Classroom teachers evaluate students’ academic progress/success for the following: Regents Prep - Formative assessments that mirrors the regents  Regents pass rate of students enrolled in Regents prep courses  Scholarship of students enrolled in AIS Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. Renewal Hour will be effective the September 2018 and end June 2019. Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. The following resources will be needed: Licensed Classroom Teachers to teach the Renewal Hour   Community Partners and CBO staff to teach support enrichment programs  CHCF (Cover partial cost of Music Production teacher).  Kinvolved to communicate with families  Parent Coordinator, School Aide, Community Assistant, Community School Director, Attendance Teacher, School Social Worker, Guidance Counselor Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA X P/F Set-aside C4E SIG Grant School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Similar to your Annual Goal, your mid-point benchmark should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound and aligned to the school’s Renewal Benchmarks 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 59  Mid-Point Benchmark:  By February 2019, 46% of students in the U cohort will be on track to graduate  By February 2019, credit accumulation for students in the first, second and third year will have increased by 3% as compared to credit accumulation data from January 2018  By February 2019, there will be a 2% decrease in students that are chronically absent Part 6b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship and Regents data   Attendance data Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 60  Section 7: Community School Description Directions: The Community School program is directly aligned to the Framework for Great Schools element – Strong Family and Community Ties. Part 1 – The Community School Program Goal(s) Indicate the summative goal(s) of the Community School program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. Meeting your SMART goal should directly impact meeting at least one of your Renewal Benchmarks and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks. Bronx High School of Business is committed to working collaboratively with students, parents, families, staff/faculty, and the greater community to enhance student achievement and ensure that every child graduates. Our mission is to prepare students to be critical thinkers ready to compete in college and careers. As evidenced by:  A 3% increase in attendance by June 2019  A 5% increase in participation of parents/guardians/caregivers by June 2019  Forging partnerships with at least 4 additional community partners and local vendors For the 2018-2019 academic school year, it is our goal to improve our attendance efforts and outcomes. We are currently analyzing data to highlights trends and patterns based on students who are chronically and severely chronically absent. In September, we will conduct a cause analysis with participants who were chronically and severely chronically absent during the 2017-2018 academic school year. To increase our attendance goal for the 2018-2019 academic school year plan on implementing attendance case management with various school stakeholders including social work interns, CHCF staff members, and school aids. Our tier incentives for attendance outcomes for each month looks as follows: Tier 1 incentive For students with at least 95% attendance 16/16 days present (depending on the number of school days during the month) = Lunch 15/16 days present (depending on the number of school days during the month) = Bacon, Egg, & Cheese Breakfast Sandwich Tier 2 Incentives For students who move from Severely Chronically absent to Chronically absent during a one month span. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 61  The trip passes for outings Or $10 Credit at local food store Tier 3 Incentives For students who move from chronically absent to at risk Afternoon Lunch outside of the building Tier 4 Incentives For students who move from At risk to not at risk. Movie passes and breakfast Please answer the following Question as it relates to meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal: Which Renewal and/or Demonstrable Improvement Benchmarks do you expect will improve by meeting your Community School Program Annual Goal? Implement Community School Model School Survey Safety result of at least 33 Part 2 – Community School Program Description Part 2a. Identify the CBO partnerships that you will develop, their target student population(s), and scope of the services provided. As well as supporting schools’ supportive environment and attendance work, CBO’s should be helping to support your school’s instructional focus. CBO Partnership Target Population Scope of Service Committee for Hispanic Children and Families All students Families New Settlement Student Success Center All students, targeting T and U cohorts/Families Parent engagement, academic and social-emotional supports, student advocacy, Renewal Hour, attendance and other initiatives aligned to the Renewal Benchmarks College career readiness Childrens Aid 9-12 grade participants Summer Youth Employment Program Part 2b. Describe how the school will meet the NYCDOE requirements for a Community School in the School Renewal program. 1. Renewal Schools are expected to partner with a community-based partner organization (CBO) and together with members of the School Leadership Team, hire a Community School Director. The Director will lead implementation of the asset and needs assessment process, and other critically important coordinating activities. Indicate how you will leverage this aspect of the work. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 62  2. 3. 4. Renewal Schools are expected to personalize the needs of all students, through strategic programming and services, as determined by the asset and needs assessment, and must also offer Expanded Learning Time (ELT) and mental health programming. In completing this section, ensure that you think about how: (1) the right services are provided to the right students and families at the right time; and (2) how you will seamlessly coordinate services with instructional programming happening throughout and outside of the school day. Indicate how you will implement this work, and describe other programming you anticipate to be in place to strengthen this initiative. Renewal Schools are expected to emerge as Partnership Schools, which are places where parents and families feel welcome, actively participate in the conversation and decision-making around the renewal of their schools, and have many opportunities to advocate for their children. Monthly meetings and Community School Forums engaging families and community stakeholders will be a critical part of this family engagement strategy. Describe how you will implement this aspect of the work. Renewal School Principals are expected to meet on a weekly basis with their Community School Director, select Assistant Principals, key staff, and other CBOs, to analyze trends in data and case manage individual students. Data tools – including the New Visions Data Sorter - and training will be available for schools to use. Indicate how you will implement this aspect of the work. The Community School Director (CSD) will be culturally and linguistically competent, and knowledgeable on the community and its resources. The CSD will be the intermediary between the CBO, the school faculty, students and parents, and the community partners. The CSD will ensure alignment and integration of all programming with the Principal's vision and school day curriculum. The CSD is integral in linking the community school to the myriad governmental supports and agencies with which the CBO already has close working relationships. The CSD will conduct the needs assessments to ensure that existing partnerships address the needs of the students and families. The needs assessment will inform service gaps that need to be filled, as well as forge and maintain new relationships in the community in order to meet those identified service gaps. The CSD identify the resources, establish the relationships, and create a strategy that facilitates referrals in the community for seamless connection to supports for community members. The CSD will be part of the school’s cabinet and the School Leadership Team building the capacity of the school to implement a community school approach, resulting in social, emotional and academic enrichment. The CSD will help shape a collaborative school culture that is aligned with the school’s pedagogy. The CSD will convene the monthly Community School team to be reflective of all stakeholders invested in our school. In partnership with the Parent Coordinator, and the PA, the CSD will develop strong relationships with families engaging them in a leadership development program that focuses on building their capacity to support their children's academic success, as well as be informed partners in the development of their community school. The CSD will have knowledge of and experience with the target community surrounding BHSB, as well as will possess extensive knowledge of youth development principles; experience working with adolescents and families; and excellent written and verbal communication skills. The CSD will have experience supervising staff; experience implementing programs; managing budgets; and experience working in partnership with and inside schools. Mental health Supports: The mental health programming piece will maximize the number of students receiving age-appropriate individual and group counseling, streamline the referral process for children and families facilitating a better follow-through rate as parents feel supported in the process, and ensure that mental health providers are caring bilingual and bicultural professionals with a unique ability to address issues specific to recently migrated youth 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 63  Working with Counseling In Schools (CIS) who has received the mental health allocation of funds for the 3 Community Schools on the Taft Campus, the CSD will supervise one social worker who will provide additional individual counseling and group counseling for general education students that have been identified as students in need of conflict resolution, stress management, effective communication, and/ or healthy relationships and for students identified as newcomers. Referrals for off-site counseling would be facilitated by both the School Social Worker and the CIS social worker to the outpatient mental health clinic located close to the school, Comunilife, Inc. Comunilife utilizes Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) structured, short-term, present-oriented psychotherapy which is time-limited and offers behavioral change. Parent Involvement: Through community partnerships, our CBO will develop programs that attract parents, establish a welcoming environment that supports learning and socializing where parents are received as problem-solvers for any challenges that the school may be facing developing their advocacy/leadership skills. To enhance the welcoming environment, parents will be invited to work alongside the three community schools to design the Family Resource Room, which parents will design. The CBO will work with the parent engagement team to develop a comprehensive communication plan that will be active and personal ensuring face-to-face outreach, visiting parents where they are in the neighborhood, phone calls, text messages, and emails. A newsletter is also a great way to enhance communication about the schools achievements both with community partners and with parents. Our CBO will ask parents to play a role in developing the newsletter and distributing it. To effectively engage parents and community resources as partners in the school, our CBO will work collaboratively with the other two community schools on the Taft Campus, with the SLT, with the PA, and the CST to create campus-wide events such as “Family Nights”, monthly forums, health fairs & resource fairs, and college fairs. Parents will play a lead role in planning and executing the events. Our CBO will work with the school to increase the number of parents invited to participate in school-specific and enrichment trips and activities. Data Collection and Analysis: Through data provided by the new visions data tool, our CBO will be part of the School Leadership Team where decision-making takes place; the attendance team analyzes the data attendance; Regents data is analyzed by the Department Teams and the steering committee; and scholarly data is analyzed by the Grade teams. The CBO uses the following tools to monitor program quality: (1) Regular supervision and observation of programming by the Director of Youth Development to ensure alignment with program goals; fidelity with workplan and budget; and attention to cultural and linguistic competencies. Adequate supervision is critical to support and enhance the work of direct service staff; (2) Attendance records for program activities, capturing involvement of both youth and families to understand the level of “dosage” or intervention; (3) Fidelity Check-lists, which capture data on when and how curricula is implemented, changes that need to be made and why, and session successes/challenges for specific curricula; (4) Pre/Post Tests that are completed by participants to assess any attitudinal, behavioral change and increase in knowledge; (5) Surveys to assess programmatic needs and gather participant feedback to inform program design and planning; (6) Focus groups, student councils, and small discussion groups to ensure connection to participant voice. Any and all data collected by the CBO will be shared with the Principal and the SLT/CST in order to identify trends and emerging needs of the students. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 64  1. The Bronx High School of Business will continue working in partnership with the Committee for Hispanic Children and Families Inc. The Community School Director is Ruben A Rivera, and will be returning for the 2018-2019 academic school. The CSD will continue to work with stakeholders to improve attendance outcomes, progress toward graduation years two and three, Regents completion rate, college readiness Index, 4-year graduation rates, school survey, and implementing a Community School Model. The CSD will lead and/or facilitate the following: - Weekly attendance team meetings - School Leadership Team meetings - Community Leadership Teams - Family Engagement efforts - Attendance Intervention Strategies - New Settlement College Program - Health and Wellness - Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) Meetings 2. Expanded Learning Time will are implemented in the school scheduled during period nine. The program will be developed to meet the needs of students focused on attendance, social/emotional needs, and academic enrichment. The afterschool program will work in conjunction with ELT to support program services. Mental Health services will continue through the following programs and services (some returning and new) - Bienvenidos Group: Group for recent student arrivals. - LGBTQ (True Colors Group): For our LGBTQ student population - Circulo De Padres: Parents support group - RAPP Coordinator services: Relationships Abuse Prevention Program - S.A.C. (Student Activities Committee) - PERC: Peer Enabled Restructured Classroom - PGC: Peer Group Connections. Mentorship program for incoming freshman 3. The CSD will work closely with the Parent Coordinator to establish monthly PTA meetings and School Leadership Team meetings that will help to increase the parent and community engagement efforts. SLT meetings take place on the second Wednesday of each month. The Parent Coordinator will work towards having monthly parent meetings with at a minimum the PTA on a monthly basis and host bi-monthly meetings with parents to share highlights, information, resources, needs, wants, and best practices. 4. The school cabinet (consisting of the Principal, CSD, AP&#39;s, and COSA) will meet on a weekly basis to share New Visions Data Portal information and examine student progress that will focus on academics, attendance, emerging themes and issues that impact the school climate and culture. Part 3 – Community School Program Implementation and Oversight Part 3a. Key Staff and Partners 1. Name and describe the scope of involvement of all community partners working in the school (include partners supporting ELT, counseling, enrichment, etc.) 2. Name the members of your Community School Team and how meetings will be organized and structured to engage all stakeholders and be focused on results. 3. Explain data strategies including the use of the data sorter, and steps that the school will take to ensure that the appropriate interventions are provided to the right students Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the Community School program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 65  The following individuals will be the key personnel who will be implementing and overseeing the Community School program: School Administrative Staff   Community School Director   CST will meet once a month on the same day at the SLT SLT Team will meet once a month The school will evaluate the following data to determine the impact on student achievement: ● Attendance Rate will be 83% ● Progress Toward Graduation - Years 2-3 ● Four year graduation rate ● Regents completion rate ● Four year college readiness index The following members are part of the Community School Team: - BHSB Parent Coordinator - Career Readiness and Community Coordinator (CHCF) - Student Government President (TBD) - CHCF Program Coordinator (TBD) - C2C Parent Advocate - PTA President - Lydia Hampton Meetings will take place once a month and the team will plan and discuss on the following topics: - Student Attendance - Academics - Community Initiatives and Engagement - Safety and school culture - School-wide events to promote community cohesion - Parent events and parent engagement strategies - Cross collaboration with community businesses and partners The New Visions Data Sorter will be utilized to examine attendance data and trends that impact attendance. Data will be examined by identifying students who are chronically absent and severely chronically absent. The data can support attendance initiatives and incentives that will be decided by the School Community Team. The data will be updated at least once a month and will identify best strategies or practices to increase student attendance, engagement, and community involvement. Part 3b. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the Community School program.   School Leaders School Staff/Faculty 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 66   CBO Staff (Community School Director; Career Readiness and Community Coordinate, Assistant Educational Speciliast) Students  CIS Social Worker  Teaching Artists   Parents/Guardians/Caregivers  Parent Coordinator  PA Team SLT Team   Extended Building Hours   Mental Health Community Partner  Partnership with School Based Health Center  Partnerships with City Agencies  Partnerships with local universities  Partnerships with other Community Based Organization  Model Teachers and Peer Collaborative Teachers  21st Century Technology Space The following staff has been identified as critical stakeholders to ensure the Community School Program and initiatives are carried through the 2018-2019: - Community School Director - Career Readiness and Community Coordinator - Assistant Educational Specialist - Social Work Interns The Bronx High School of Business will utilize financial literacy curriculum from the Council for Economic Education. The Extended Learning Time will be implemented ninth period (2:42 - 3:35 p.m.) Monday through Friday. The After school program is scheduled to take place from 3:45 p.m. - 5:15 p.m. Monday through Thursday. Part 3c. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. For Community School Program: The school will essentially be open for longer hours, six days a week, year-round, accessible to everyone in the community. Part 3d. Mental Health Work Plan Separate from this RSCEP, schools will complete a Mental Health Work Plan that will become an addendum to this document. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 67  Section 8: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Credit Deficient and or Missing Regents Mathematics Credit Deficient and or Missing Regents Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Traditional Classroom Instruction for Credit Deficiencies Regents Prep courses Traditional Classroom Instruction for Credit Deficiencies Regents Prep courses Science Credit Deficient and or Missing Regents Traditional Classroom Instruction for Credit Deficiencies Regents Prep courses 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.)  Small group tutoring for regents prep  Traditional Classroom Instruction for Credit Deficiencies  Regents Prep for students who are Missing Regents  Peer Tutoring  Small group tutoring for regents prep  Traditional Classroom Instruction for Credit Deficiencies  Regents Prep for students who are Missing Regents  Peer Tutoring  Small group tutoring for regents prep  Traditional Classroom Instruction During the school day AfterSchool and Saturday Tutoring Lunch and Learn Tutoring Saturday Program During the school day AfterSchool and Saturday Tutoring Lunch and Learn Tutoring Saturday Program During the school day AfterSchool and Saturday Tutoring 68  Social Studies Credit Deficient and or Missing Regents Traditional Classroom Instruction for Credit Deficiencies Regents Prep courses At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Mandated Counseling and Crisis Counseling Mandated Services are identified in the student’s IEP, and Crisis counseling as needed for Credit Deficiencies Lunch and Learn Tutoring  Regents Prep for students who are Missing Regents  Peer Tutoring Small group tutoring for regents prep Traditional Classroom Instruction for Credit Deficiencies Regents Prep for students who are Missing Regents Peer Tutoring One to One Saturday Program During the school day AfterSchool and Saturday Tutoring Lunch and Learn Tutoring Saturday Program During the school day and ELT Small Group 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 69  Section 9: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 20% of our students live in temporary housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population.  Advisory counseling groups to provide students with additional social-emotional supports  Use budget allocations to buy students supplies and other school supplies  Monitor their attendance closely and match these students with a mentor  CBO will work with families in temporary housing to connect them to outside agencies that might be of assistance to them  Building relationships with the local shelters where our students are housed Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). Not applicable 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 70  Not applicable 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. Not applicable 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 71  Section 10: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The following outlines the measures that will be taken to ensure that Bronx High School of Business staff are High Qualified: Recruitment of HQT: Teachers are recruited based on school/student needs. This is done collaboratively with Supervising A.P. of the Department, Teacher Leader of the Department, and the school principal. The process is as follows: School community expresses the need of recruiting a teacher   Vacancy is posted on Galaxy as needed  Principal conducts interviews  Principal, Assistant Principal, and teachers from hiring department coordinate demo lesson  The process is repeated if teacher does not meet the standards outlined in the Danielson Framework for Teaching or the best candidate is offered the position Support and Retention of HQT:  Professional development (in house or external)   Teachers are provided are provided opportunities to collaborate in grade teams, department teams, , working Formative and rated observations with actionable feedback with Renewal and FSC Coaches and outside consultants, inter-visitations, peer-observations, off-site professional development Types of professional development: Pedagogical  Professional development on the Danielson Framework for Teaching, formative assessment, engaging students in learning, student-to-student discussion, differentiation of instruction, development and refning of CCLS units, Witsi strategies, feedback, instructional strategies to meet the needs of ENL and SWDs, data-driven instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 72  Non-Pedagogical School-wide Systems Social-Emotional Support Family Engagement     Community Engagement 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Types of professional developments: Teachers and Paraprofessionals: Pedagogical  Danielson Framework for Teaching Pedagogical Skills Based Formative assessment in classrooms   Aligning Common Core Learning Standards to Curriculum  Use of text complexity     Teacher providing actionable feedback to student work utilizing a variety of assessment strategies  Teacher sharing resources in Google Classroom Environment with other teachers Strategies for teaching ELLs and SWDs Incorporating technology into instruction Students write responses to writing prompts Paraprofessionals:  Content area professional development   Instructional strategies to meet the needs of ELLs and SWDs Strategies for collaborating with classroom teachers Principal: Systems to ensure accountability at all levels   Creating a school culture based on high expectations and collaboration  Assistance in developing a viable and engaging Saturday Program for parents Assistant Principals  Continue professional development on the Danielson rubric  Enhancing leadership skills  Using data to inform instruction 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 73  Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are actively engaged in collaborative settings (Department - Grade) to decide the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures to include student work. The following identifies what the grade teams did and will continue to do for next school year is: Grade Team ● Data Source Used were regents results, specifically ELA ● Items Skills Analysis was performed to drill down to a specific skill that can be found across the curriculum ● Identify the strategies needed to address the skills identified in the previous step ● Infuse the strategy into the lessons ● Assess student progress Department Teams in a Professional Development  Science - Social Studies - ELA departments looked at the ELA data and concentrated on the literacy skills that are found throughout their curriculum/subject area and identify areas of strengths and needs  Math department looked at the math skills to identify areas of strengths and needs 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 74   All departments were then required to revise their curriculum to meet the needs of the expectations 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (RSCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X N/A X N/A X N/A X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5D N/A 5A, 5B, 5D N/A 5A N/A 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 228,860 0 37,793 0 13,774 0 2,948,303 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 75  which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/RSCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 76  Section 11: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X412, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronx High School of Business will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 77  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help    The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 78   encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X412, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships     conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 79   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs;  Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities and his/her age;  Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary;  Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes);   Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; and/or quality family time  Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;  Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district;  Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;  Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  Participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 80   Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child;  Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities       attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 81  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 82  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Bronx High School of Business (BHSB) has a total of 250 students from which 106 students or 42.4% are English as a New Language students (ENL). The EDAT Analysis shows that 16 or 15.1% students are classified as long-term ELLs. Additionally, we have 23 or 21.7% students under-credited based on age for high school. From our population, 16 or 15.1% passed the ELA Regents, 8 students advanced two (2) proficiency levels, 23 students advanced one (1) proficiency level, and 29 students remained at the same level of proficiency, 5 students scored expanding scoring 3 or 4 on the ELA Regents, and 6 students scored commanding. In order to serve our population two years ago we started a Spanish Transitional Bilingual Education Program (S-TBE) in which we offer students Math (Algebra), Global, and Native Spanish classes. In conjunction, we offer a Free Standing English as a New Language Program for students whose native language is not Spanish. Subgroups and grade level of students to be served: The supplemental program will cater to all Ells in grades 9-12. Sub-Groups by Grade and Proficiency Levels GRADE EN EM TR EXP COM TOTAL 9 11 07 08 07 0 33 10 07 09 11 07 0 34 11 00 03 09 13 0 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 83  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 25 12 00 01 09 04 0 14 TOTAL 18 20 37 31 0 106 The EDAT Report shows that our students scored Low at Writing, Reading, listening and Speaking Modalities. Students by Grade and Modalities of Need Grade Scored low Writing Scored low Reading Scored low listening Scored low in Speaking 9 7 0 0 2 10 13 2 0 8 11 6 0 0 3 12 2 0 0 1 Programming of students at Bronx High School of Business (BHSB) is by grade. Two of the subgroups that are struggling in our school are the ninth and tenth grade Ells. Most of our incoming students are either entering or emerging. Since many of our students arrive late at BHSB, they need extra help with English Language Arts, Science, Social Studies and Math classes and Regents prep. To bolster their performance on the Regents exams we will offer a Saturday Program (“Bulls Literacy Program” at BHSB) that will have one ENL teacher working 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 84  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information with one content area teacher: Global, US History, or Living Environment. In addition, students will have an ENL class that will help them with listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Each Saturday will have two, two-hour sessions 9:00 am to 11:00 and 12:00 to 2:00 pm. Consequently, students will have the opportunity to review all the materials they need to succeed on those exams. We are committed to start the program on October 6 2018 and will end the next semester on June 8 2019, for 29 sessions. In the Bulls Literacy Program, the ENL teacher will collaborate with content area teachers to enhance and differentiate instruction. The content area teacher will be the lead teacher; the ENL teacher will share responsibilities in order to present the class using different modalities to enhance learning of the target content skills. All materials used will be given in two languages, English and Spanish, the materials presented will review the one presented in class; however, extra time will be allowed for the most difficult material, or material that need extra background or skills to understand. During the second period the ENL teacher will work with students to develop their listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in small groups to give one-to-one attention to students that will need to take the ELA Regents and came late to our school. This will also serve to provide students with necessary preparation for Regents and the NYSESLAT. Overall, we intend to serve around 40 students that need to develop their listening, reading, writing and speaking skills in their new language, English. Currently, 38 of these students are entering and emerging, 17 are newcomers, being in the country for less than six months, and are low- emerging. All of them need extra help to pass the Living Environment, Global, and Algebra 1 Regents. Schedule and Duration: The Saturday Program will meet for 29 sessions from 9: 00 am to 2:00 pm. The program which is divided into two periods; each period consists of two hours length. Further, in order to program students based on their needs the scholarship data will be used. This program is designed to help our rising juniors and new comers that need extra help in speaking, listening, reading and writing as well as prepare them for the Regents and NYSESLAT. We based our population on the Regents Data. Regents Data shows a 31.81% (14) passed Global, 41.50 % (21) passed the Living Environment, and 36.36% (8) passed the ELA. (Last year’s numbers, waiting to update) Language of Instruction: The primary language of instruction is English. However, native language support will be used to make content comprehensible to students. Number and type of certified teachers: The following teachers will participate in the grant: Maurine Watts, Social Studies 7-12 Initial Certificate; Elizabeth Solis, English To Speakers of Other Languages & ELA Professional Certificate, Vilma Delgado: English To Speakers Of Other Languages Permanent Certificate; Bilingual Education (Non-Elementary) Permanent Extension. Materials: In order to make the content comprehensible for Ells' students we need to use different materials and aids. New York State approved bilingual glossaries will be used by students to help with comprehension. In addition, we will use different Internet materials and other books.Another program that we want to implement is The BHSB After School Program, at "not cost" to the program. This program will meet two days a week: Tuesdays, and Thursday from 3:45 pm to 5:30 pm. one of the goals of this program is to develop students' verbal skills. This group is made up in its majority of newcomers, ninth, and tenth graders who need to develop vocabulary, reading and speaking skills in English and Spanish. In addition, we intend to help students to develop their math skills. The aim of this program is not only academic, but to create a collaborative culture at BHSB. Therefore, students feel part of the community, and allow students to express themselves, and develop confidence. Schedule and Duration: The After School Program will meet for 58 sessions from 3: 45 am to 5:30 pm. The Program consists of one hour and 30 minutes length; on Mondays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays. Language of Instruction: The primary language of instruction is English. However, native language support will be used to make content comprehensible to 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 85  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information students. Number and type of certified teachers: There will be one teacher: Vilma Delgado: English To Speakers Of Other Languages Permanent Certificate; Bilingual Education (Non-Elementary) Permanent Extension. Ramon Vila, Spanish Day High School Permanent Certificate, Sylvia Castellanos, Math Permanent Certificate. The records for both programs; the After School Program and the Saturday Program will be kept in a binder, in room 243B, in the ENL Coordinator Office. Some of the records to be kept will be the parents' permission for participation, attendance, list of materials, teachers' and Assistant Principal's credentials, the vacancy positions, list of Ells, examples of lessons and students work. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: At Bronx High School of Business, we understand the value of Professional Development. Professional Developments ensure that teachers further their careers and keep their skills current. The PDs we are committed to develop are at “no cost” to the program. The PDs needs to be aligned with the New York City Renewal Schools Initiatives and with the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Topics: Rationale: The on-going PDs will give Ells and general education teachers a strong and consistent support needed to meet the instructional and academic rigor requirements. Date: Ongoing throughout the year Time: Mondays (as part of the mandated professional development afternoons) Name of Provider: Bronx High School of Business Instructional Coaches Assistant Principals HSAI- Coaches Lead Teachers 9. Topic: EngageNY: Lesson and Unit Development Rationale: ENL, ELA Teachers working to create units of instructions based on the expected academic rigor for all students. Date: On-Going September 2016-June 2017. Time: As part of the mandated professional development afternoons Providers: ELA’s Coach, Assistant Principals 10. Topic: Our School's Programs and Services for English Language Learners Rationale: Informing school's staff of ENL program, terms, and assessments of English as a New Language Learners. Date: Ongoing during the year Time: As part of the mandated professional development afternoons Providers: ENL Teachers, Ms. Delgado, Solis and Portorreal ESL Teachers 11. Topic: Different topics on SIFE Services and Teaching Methods 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 86  Part C: Professional Development Rationale: Learning and turnkey of SIFE instruction and services of the SIFE population in our school. Date: Ongoing during the semester Time: When offered by the Department of Education Office of SIFE Services Provider: SIFE Services Office T Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Parental engagement is one of our priorities areas of concern. We understand that when parents are involved in their children education the rate of success is higher. We are developing five workshops for our ENL parents. We intend to discuss the following topics at “no cost” to the program: Topics to be covered: 1. How can I help my child to deal with stress? ¿Cómo puedo ayudar a mi hijo(a) a lidiar con el estress? 2. Family Nights at school 3. Citizenship (Where and who can give me help with my citizenship problem?) 4. Help with my income tax: Where and when can I get help filling my taxes? Do they speak Spanish? 5. My school community: Who are my child teachers? What are they learning? Schedule and duration The workshops will meet once per month starting on October 2018 through June 2017, for 2.5 hours on Saturdays, starting at 10:00 am to 12:30 pm. The expected Saturdays are October 20, November 17, December 15, February 9 and March 11. Provider: This class will have a combination of presenters: Our Counselors, ENLs Teachers, Parent Coordinator, and The Committee for the Hispanics Children and Families. Notification: Letters will be sent to parents in their preferred language (English and Spanish). The second reminder in a form of a card will be sent home with the dates of the classes. Further, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 87  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities a call using the telephone messenger will be used as reminder before each class. In addition, the Parent Coordinator will provide information at PTA meetings. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other 2018-19 RSCEP-PF Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 88 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. TOTAL 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 89  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name Bronx High School of Business Borough Bronx School Number 412 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Alice Bajana-Vega Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Vilma Delgado Teacher/Subject Area Silvia Castellanos/Math Teacher/Subject Area Andrea Cruz/Social Studies Related-Service Provider Betty De Los Santos-Coleman Superintendent Michael Alcoff Assistant Principal Fay Brown-Satchell Coach type here School Counselor Ebony Reid Parent Zoila Mejia Parent Coordinator Diosa Reyes Field Support Center Staff Member Sabrina Cruz Other (Name and Title) Evelyn Rodriguez/Community Sch C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification N/A Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 90  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 264 Total number of ELLs 107 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 40.53% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 1 10 11 12 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 Tot # 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Bronx High School of Business uses a number of assessments to guide the instructional planning for our ELLs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The following structures are in place to ensure that assessment data is being used to guide instructional planning and meet the needs of ELLs: 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Bronx High School of Business uses the following summative assessments to identify progress: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 91  4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Department teams meet to analyze results of data from the various assessments used to measure student progress and growth. Teams meet weekly to analyze the data and make instructional decisions based on the data including, but not limited to, interventions that will be provided, adjustments to units and lessons, and grouping of students. Additionally, programming decisions for students are also made based on the data to ensure that students are in the right setting and are receiving the necessary supports in the L2. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school will use the following data to provide students with additional support. Some of the categories we look are: 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The EDAT results show: After the NYSESLAT scores are released, the ENL Department will meet to review data and assess patterns in scores, then the ENL Department shares the information with the rest of the staff. After that, we can make changes in programming, and plan for the year ahead. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? When the results of the NYSESLAT are made available we meet with the Assistant Principal, Mr. Barba, to make programming changes. Also, we intend to disseminate the information to all teachers in order for them to understand and support our students. In addition, tutoring, and extracurricular activities can be developed to provide students' support since the beginning of the school year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Bronx High School of Business Freestanding ENL Program provide students with an ENL class giving support in their native language (the majority of the students have a Spanish native language), and all the other classes are in English. Some of the classes have the ENL teachers and a content area teacher in order to offer support to the ELLs. In addition, all ELLs must take an English Language Arts class that has and ELA plus and ENL teacher to offer home language support. Furthermore, the school follows the different unit of studies time allocations for the different levels (entering, 540 minutes, emerging, 360 minutes, transitioning, 180 minutes, expanding, 180, and commanding, 90 minutes per week). b. TBE program. If applicable. Our school has a Transitional Bilingual Spanish Program for grades 9th and 10th. In addition to the ENL classes our TBE program offers Science, Global, and Math classes in their native language with the premise that when students reach their commanding status, they are placed on the monolingual program. All students in the TBE program must take an HLA class. We follow the CR Part 154-2 units of study using the different students’ levels. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 92  c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 2. Bronx High School of Business ENL classes are divided by levels as follow: The TBE Program: The ELA program at Bronx High School of Business: The HLA 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The programs offered at our school are Freestanding ENL, TBE Spanish: Freestanding: TBE Program 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? HLA classes are an integral part of our Bilingual Program. It is imperative that we ensure that the HLA instruction is of the highest caliber and aligned to the ELA instruction and the Common Core Curriculum. To ensure that all HLAs are appropriately evaluated students are programmed to take classes divided by levels. The HLA classes are used as a scaffold to develop the necessary skills to pass the Regents and to continue college studies. At the end of each unit of learning; example: poetry, short stories, and drama they take an end of the unit assessment. In addition, they do projects and presentations. At the end of the semester, they take a cumulative test. Furthermore, HLA students are prepared to take the LOTE at the end of two years. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 6A. Our instructional plan for SIFE students includes intensive differentiation using the SIOP Model. In addition, teachers are participating of SIFE PDs to bring new strategies, materials, and methods to better serve our students. 6B. Newcomers will be grouped according to their proficiency level and will continue to receive instruction that is differentiated and scaffolded to his/her needs. Graphic organizers and writing templates will be used to help students organize and develop emerging writing skills. Teachers will help students to build schema as a foundation for new language and content. Vocabulary development through the use of glossaries, word wall will continue to be a focal point of ESL instruction. 6C and D. The administration and teachers recognize that there is a special challenge with ELLs’ receiving service for 4 to 6 years and long term ENLs. Our instructional approach serves to encourage language proficiency as well as to offer them opportunities to take advanced courses. As students at a business school, ELLs are exposed to computer skills and the art of developing a small business. ENL learners play a pivotal role in our Virtual Enterprise program. Students are offered rigorous Regents prep classes in Mathematics, Sciences, Social Studies and English Language Arts. Students take the PSAT and are encouraged to take SATs. The college expectation is extended to ENL students; they are expected to apply to college, 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 93  complete financial aid application and attend college fairs. Guidance Counselors and ENL teachers will provide one to one motivational conferences with long term ENLs. 6E. Former Ells are provided with services in a form of .5 unit of study per week of integrated ENL in an ELA class or in a content area. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL and content teachers use a variety of instructional strategies to make language and content comprehensible to ENLs and ELL-SWDs These include: Our primary goal is to to provide ENL and ELL-SWD students with daily opportunities to engage in speaking, and writing tasks regardless of their proficiency level by providing them with multiple entry points in each lesson. Therefore, they can demonstrate higher-order thinking skills in their verbal and written arguments. (BHSB' Instructional Focus) 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our programming has the flexibility to accommodate our ENL learners and SWDs. Our ENL classes are programmed at simultaneously (during the same periods). Therefore, students can move across proficiency levels If the need arises without too much interference in their schedule. All ENL teachers meet during common planning periods to evaluate and plan units of instruction. ENL teachers are provided with time to meet with ELA' teachers to discuss research-based strategies and performance of students and co-planning. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. There are many active programs in our school that serve Ells: ELA – Intervention Science – Intervention Math-Intervention Global-Intervention Goals: -Pass the ELA Regents -Improve English skills. Goals: -Pass LE and/or Earth Science Regents Goal: -Pass Algebra & Geometry Regents Goals: -Pass Global Regents Especially for: However, all Ells are welcomed Especially for: However, all Ells are welcomed Especially for: However, all Ells are welcomed Especially for: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 94  However, all Ells are welcomed Tutoring on Wednesdays, and Thursdays From 4:00-6:00 PM Tutoring on Mondays and Wednesdays from 4:00- 6:00 PM Tutoring on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 4:oo-6:00 PM Saturday Program From 8:30-1:00 PM Saturday Program From 8:30-1:00 PM Saturday Program From 8:30-1:00 PM APEX Credit Recovery for students that are in need of credits. Saturday Program From 8:30-1:00 PM The purpose of these programs is to provide ELLs students with the opportunity to extend their learning time outside their regular classroom day in a nurturing environment. Additionally, these programs provide the opportunity to provide one-on-one help with the skills they need to succeed in school. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For this school year we want to use the Families, Schools, and Communities, which will be taught first, then the two units Challenges and Solutions, and Human Migration will be taught simultaneously as recommended in the DOE curriculum page. We also want to incorporate common core units into the curriculum for all levels of ELLs.We want to create three groups of ELLs that have specific needs, As part of our population needs we want to create “The Early Stars Program” a special group of Ells of no more than (20) twenty students where we start teaching the very basic listening, reading, writing and speaking skills. In other words, vocabulary development, grammar, and syntax reading fluency, including oral reading skills, and dictionary skills. This program will meet after school for two hours from Mondays to Thursdays. At this moment we have identified 18 students that will need these services. The program has to be taught by an ENL teacher. In addition, we want to begin the program from the second week in September 2017. Another group that we have compiled for services is “The Mid Stars Program” a special program for which we have identified (23) twenty-three students that need basic reinforcement in their writing skills. We intend, to begin with, sentence structure and end writing different types of essays that will help them with their essay writing for the ELA Regents. This program will meet for two hours, from Monday to Thursdays. We intend to begin during the second week of September 2017. The third group that we have compiled "The Ever-Changing Stars Program" a special group from which we have identified (12) twelve students that need reinforcement of the writing skills. We intend to begin by explaining the tasks of the Regents. Further, reviewing literary elements and devices and how to integrate them in their writing. This program will meet for two hours, from Monday to Thursdays. We intend to begin during the second week of September 2017. The program has to be taught by an ENL teacher. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We will not discontinue any program; all entitled students will continue to receive services. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. English as a New Language Learners at Bronx High School of Business are offered equal access to all instructional and social programs. ELLs are exposed to the academic rigor of Regents prep courses and classes. They are offered the opportunity to take Advance Placement courses in language. All students including ELLs take the PSAT and are encouraged to sit for the 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 95  SATs. ENL learners are expected to apply to college and attend college fairs sponsored by the school and outside organizations. ENL learners take part in all social programs including senior week, trips to museums, and annual talent show. ELLs are active members of several varsity sport teams. All ELLs are strongly encouraged to be active members of our Saturday AIS. Through the Title III grant, ELLs receive additional AIS services to aid in language acquisition. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. There are several sources of instructional materials that are used to support ENL instruction at Bronx High School of Business. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Language support is provided using: 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The programs that are offered as apart of the core instructional program and as supplemental services are age and grade appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Bronx High School of Business is located at Taft Educational Campus where shares the building with five other schools. We are mainly located on the second floor with the Bronx Collegiate Academy. We have 7 classrooms and 5 offices. We share the first floor with New Directions. On the first floor we have 8 classrooms and the Teachers' Launch. We share the Lunch Room, Gym, and Weigh Room with all the five schools.Each school is responsible of keeping order in their part of the hallway. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the Summer, the Enrichment Program gives services to newly enrolled students to our school. When a newly enrolled Ell comes to our school, the Counselor, Ms. Reid, presents the student to his/her first classroom. Then, we have organized a group of students that will guide the new student for at least a week, until he/she feels comfortable to locate the different classrooms, gym, cafeteria, etc. We believe that communication between the same age group welcomes and help new students to acclimate in a new setting. Every month we have the "ELLs Town Halls" where we welcome new students, and celebrate all ELLs. We intend to promote the ELLs as a big family. We celebrate attendance, best improve student of the month, different achievements, birthdays, share stories, and announcements. All ENL teachers participate: Ms. Delgado, Ms. Portorreal, and Ms. Solis. The school's Principal, Ms. Bajana, and the Counselor, Ms. Reid also participate.Our CBO's Counselor, Ms. Vazquez, provides services to newly enrolled Ells through a group called "Bienvenidos" where new enroll ELLs have the opportunity to talk about different topics, express their problems, and share experiences. Bienvenidos members go on different trips around the city to experience New York. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently, Spanish is the only language elective offered to our students. ELL students that show proficiency are placed in AP Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? We do not have a dual language program. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 96  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional Development and Support for Schools Workshops: Presenter: Ms. Ebony Escoto, College Advisor Bronx High School of Business Date: Presenter: Representative from the SAT Date: Before October 2017 Presenter: The Community for Hispanic Children and Families, Inc. Date: November 2017 Presenter: The Community for Hispanic Children and Families, Inc. Date: January 2018 Teachers Workshops Presenter: Representative from the Smart-Boards, Inc. September 2017 Presenter: Socorro Diaz Date: 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parental involvement is essential for the success of Bronx High School of Business. There are many ways in which we attempt to increase parent involvement in our school. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 97  There are many activities at our school where Ell parents are involved. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 98 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Alice Bajana-Vega, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 99  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx High School of Business School DBN: 09X412 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Alice Bajana-Vega Title Principal Fay Brown-Satchell Assistant Principal Diosa Reyes Parent Coordinator Vilma Delgado ENL/Bilingual Teacher Zoila Mejia Parent Silvia Castellanos/Math Teacher/Subject Area Andrea Cruz/Social Studies Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Ebony Reid School Counselor Michael Alcoff Sabrina Cruz Betty De Los Santos-Coleman N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist Other Social Worker Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 06/30/17 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 100  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X412 School Name: Bronx High School of Business Superintendent: Michael Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Diosa Reyes Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school.  The Home Language Survey given at the initial interview for all students  The Parent Selection from for ELLs used to identify different languages  The BNDC Report from ATS which list all the languages spoke in school that are other than English 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 101  Language Afrikaans Albanian Arabic Bengali (Bangla) French GA Mandinka (Mandingo) Written Preferred Percent Written English Spanish 41.55 54.59 English Spanish Vietnamese 173 225 Oral Preferred Percent Oral 41.79 54.35 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Afrikaans, Albanian, GA, Mandinka (Aka Mandingo), Vietnamese Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families Parent-teacher conferences letters Before each of the two conferences in the Spring and Fall semester. Regents Information January, June and August Information about tutoring, and different programs offer by our school Every semester How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Many of our staff is bilingual Spanish and they do the translations for our school. If we need to include another language we could use the "Big Word" services. About 50% of our staff is bilingual in English and Spanish. Written translations will be provided by on-site staff and the translation Unit. If there is an emergency and need to include another language we could use the "Big Word" services. About 50% of our staff is bilingual in English and Spanish. Written translations will be provided by on-site staff and the translation Unit. If there is an emergency and need to include 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 102  Guidance letters about academic progress Every marking period. Attendance outreach letters A few times a month, as needed another language we could use the "Big Word" services. About 50% of our staff is bilingual in English and Spanish. Written translations will be provided by on-site staff and the translation Unit. If there is an emergency and need to include another language we could use the "Big Word" services. Many of the letters used are already translated in various languages and the templates are already available.About 50% of our staff is bilingual in English and Spanish. Written translations will be provided by on-site staff and the translation Unit. If there is an emergency and need to include another language we could use the "Big Word" services. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-teacher conferences Twice in Spring and twice in Fall. Academic Open Houses At least five (5) per year on Saturdays Guidance Meeting Weekly Parent Association Meetings Monthly interpretation service(s)? Teachers from our school and other staff will do the written and spoken translations. Teachers and staff work collectively to do the translations. Teachers and staff will translate in these meetings. Teachers and staff will do the translations in these meetings. In addition, our school counts with a system that allows simultaneously translation in these meetings and special events. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Bronx High School of Business teachers and employees can use the following resources to communicate with English Language Learners families: 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 103  Teachers use the 3 way call system to communicate with ELLs parents.  Teachers use the phone script to talk to parents.  After parents have been drill for an emergency, tell their home language first when calling school  Teacher or school employee access the Over-the-Phone Interpreter services o (Dial 1-855-249-9103, or, 1-800-231-0288; Indicates Language needed, provides our school's DBN (099412)) **Always ask parents if they understand. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. A professional development will be provided to the entire staff to explain the Chancellor's Regulation a-663. The staff will be given different resources that they can use to meet the regulation. These resources are:  Handout on how to access the Language Line Interpretation.  The LAC LL Phone Scrip for an Emergencies.  All staff members will be given instructions in how to use the 800 number and the six (6) digits code. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..)  Since the intake interview all parents are explained their right to receive information in their home language. Once parents fill-in the HLS and the Parent Selection Survey, they will select the language that they want us to use when they are called, written or when they visit our school.  Again, parents will receive brochures, flyers, and letters in their preferred language as well as in multiple languages.  Parents will be able to look at the displays around school of different languages that are present in our school. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services?  When parents visit or participate in different events, they are asked for feedback to improve our translation  services. Ms. Reyes, the LAC Coordinator is in charge of implementing these changes to improve our services. In addition, any new number or information that the ENL teachers gather during the school year will be shared with Ms. Reyes , the LAC Coordinator to keep records timely.  Parent surveys, parent/guardian meetings, informal conversations, school events, etc. 2018-19 RSCEP-PF 104  2018-19 RSCEP-PF 105 
