 10X437 School Name: FORDHAM HIGH SCHOOL FOR THE ARTS Principal: IRIS BLIGE   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Fordham High School for the Arts 10x437 321000011437 9-12 School Number (DBN): 500 East Fordham Road Bronx, NY 10458 718-733-4656 Phone Number: 718-295-3605 Fax: Iris Blige iblige@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Iris Blige Linda Key Angel Crespo Michael Johnson Abiodun Akwe Luis Ramos Monica Jones N/A District Information Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-3157 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue Bronx, NY 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: Fax: 718-828-3113   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Iris Blige Linda Key Angel Crespo Chad White Abiodun Akwe Luis Ramos Monica Jones James Mazzarano Khrystie-Ann Clark Yudelka Ramirez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Parent   Name Wanda Bowman Diego Rodriguez Madeline T. Rodriguez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Fordham High School for the Arts’ mission recognizes the need of artistically talented students to attend a local high school that offers a strong instructional program in instrumental music, vocal music, dance, drama and visual arts. These disciplines are incorporated into the regular school day. Our standards-based – four year program is designed to prepare all students with the choice of attending an institution of higher learning in a traditional academic area or in performance/visual arts.   Fordham High School for the Arts’ vision is a school community that uses the performing arts as a tool to help students meet their academic and creative needs. We pride ourselves in building relationships with all constituencies to forge ahead in providing a community that is safe and nurturing. Fordham High School for the Arts is committed to fostering an integrated learning environment that ensures that each student has the opportunity to embrace the “arts” as well as the academics. In addition, Fordham High School for the Arts teachers and parents strive to understand the value of sharing ideas and best practices to increase student achievement. In 2015, 2016, and 2017, the graduation rate for students attending Fordham High School for the Arts was above 90%. Additionally, survey data and 2015-2016 Quality Review data indicate that Well Developed structures are in place for a positive learning environment, inclusive culture, and student success. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The strengths at Fordham High School for the Arts lie in its mission to create a fine and performing arts program in the Bronx. A partnership with practicing artists affords students the opportunity to explore and develop their talents in various mediums of artistic expression. Fordham High School for the arts supports a culture where the arts are valued within a comprehensive college preparatory program. Our present student population is approximately 357 students, grades 9 – 12. Over 90 percent of our student population is economically disadvantaged and qualify for free or reduced lunch indicating that they are from low income families. For the 2018-2019 academic year, Fordham High School for the Arts has expanded it's creative arts program to include technical theater. Additionally, the school was just recently named as a College Access for All (CA4A) and a Computer Science for All (CS4A) school. The school has continued to strengthen it's partnership with Roundabout Theatre, Vital Theatre, NYSSMA, Jazz at Lincoln Center, and OneGoal. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Fordham High School for the Arts' current student population is 357 which consists of: 4.2% English Language Learners (ELL) 19.89% Special Education The instructional model implemented at the school to support the specific needs of our Students with Disabilities and our English Language Learners is Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ICT). We ensure that in addition to a special education and a content teacher in our ICT classes, our English Language Learners are provided an ENL Teacher who pushes into content based classrooms to ensure that students receive the following services.  Reading for Scientific Content  Writing  Numeracy 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Over the past year the school made the most progress in the following areas:   Students earning 10+ credits in their 2nd Year (All Students) Students earning 10+ credits in their 2nd Year (School's Lowest Third) 0   6-Year Graduation Rate  6-Year High School Persistence Rate  Post-Secondary Enrollment Rate - 6 Months  Post-Secondary Enrollment Rate - 10 Months  College and Career Preparatory Course Index  4-Year College Readiness Index The key areas of focus for this school year are to improve the following:  The number of students earning 10+ credits in their 1st Year - All Students  The number of students earning 10+ credits in their 1st Year - School's Lowest Third  The number of students earning 10+ credits in their 3rd Year - All Students  The number of students earning 10+ credits in their 3rd Year - School's Lowest Third  Average Completion Rate for Remaining Regents  Average Regents Score for Global History, US History, Living Environment, Algebra, and English  4-Year Graduation Rate  4-Year High School Persistence Rate  6-Year College Readiness Index  College Persistence 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X437 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 356 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 16 15 8 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 16 9 12 7 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 79.2% % Reduced Lunch 4.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 61.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.0% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 14.25 10% 59% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 98% 90% 92.1% 20.8% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 63 57 1 9 91.8% 10.4% 18.8% 33.7% 1.4% 2.0% 2 45% 6.2 N/A N/A 98% 89% 95.4% 19% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A YES YSH N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review, the school received a Quality Review Rating of Well-Developed for Indicators 1.1 (Rigorous, Engaging, and Coherent Curricula aligned to CCLS), 1.2 (Research Based Effective Instruction that yields high quality student work), 2.2 (Curricula-aligned assessment practices that inform instruction). Additionally compared to the borough and city average, the 2016-2017 Framework reflects positive improvement for the following NYC School Survey Measures: o Rigorous Instruction (Course Clarity, Quality of Student Discussion and Academic Press) 2. According to the 2016-2017 Framework, the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework Element in comparison to the borough and city average are: As a performing arts high school, students at Fordham High School for the Arts have the opportunity to take the Chancellor's Arts Exit Exam at the end of their senior year to receive an Arts-Endorsed Diploma. Although the percentage of students passing the corresponding Arts Exit Exam for their respective studios has increased over the past 5 years, we have decided to focus on this goal because passing of the Arts Exit Exam helps fulfill graduation requirements for students to receive the highest distinction on their diplomas, an Advanced Regents Diploma. Data from the five previous years indicate the following trends: Overall Graduation Rate - 83.80% (2013), 87.40% (2014), 86.52% (2015), 97.33% (2016), 94.00% (2017), and 96.55% (2018) Advanced Regents Diploma - 13.75% (2013), 16.13% (2014), 2.25% (2015), 9.30% (2016), 21.00% (2017), and 33.33% (2018) Arts-Endorsed Diploma - 36.70% (2013), 34.40% (2014), 39.30% (2015), 54.70% (2016), 61.00% (2017), and 74.71% (2018) 3  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, content teacher teams will collaboratively develop rigorous aligned units of study and tasks to improve instruction resulting in 2% increase in the school's Regents pass rates at the end of the 2018-2019. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers ensure that unit and lesson plans that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS coherent curriculum introduce complex materials and resources that stimulate higher order thinking and build deep conceptual understanding and knowledge around specific content. All students September 2018 - June 2019 during 6th period Administration Faculty They have developed a shared understanding of effective instruction by having multiple professional developments during our common planning time periods which have been developed by our lead teacher team. The school leaders and teachers develop a data driven culture based on student needs, assessments and analysis, which leads to strategic action planning that informs instruction and results in greater student achievement outcomes. Teachers continually reflect on prior preparation, emerging needs, pedagogical improvements, and strategies to communicate results to students, thus ensuring that new action plans are comprehensive enough to improve future outcomes. As a result teachers clearly understand expectations. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Administration Faculty September 2018 - June 2019 after Mid-terms, finals and Regents exams General Educations, Students with disabilities, English Language Learners and other high need subgroups How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The CAT department continues to hold after-school concerts and performances inviting families and friends to participate as audience members to gain a deeper understanding of their students learning mathematics and literacy in the arts. In addition, the school holds a Bi-annual Title I meeting where parents are engaged in a professional learning session facilitated by mathematics and literacy instructors. The school will continue to partner with universities to provide college nights, college level courses and college intern mentors to support students’ as well as parents’ logistical and emotional preparation to meet the demands of the rigorous instruction needed to succeed in college and career. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 5  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will continue with its utilization of the iLearnNYC courses through the use of various vendors. Other technology initiatives will continue to permeate throughout the classrooms with the use of mounted Smartboards, Ipads, Laptops (Macs). Our professional development sessions and department meetings provide teachers an opportunity to collaborate and share information regarding effective teaching strategies in the Learner Active Technology - Infused Classrooms and other promising practices. We will continue to offer a week long professional development opportunity for our teachers in August/September and teachers will be paid for this session. The session is offered to all 30 teachers for 5 days @ 6 hours a day for one week at the end of the summer. The teachers are provided with several books such as The Wong Book, Co-Teaching Book, Make Just One Change: Teach Students to Ask their Own Questions, and Mathematical Mindsets. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Teachers will analyze the alignment of student assessments to the common core by reviewing students results on midterms, January Regents and Final Exams for Term One. Teachers analyze student data approximately eight times throughout the year, as there are two semesters, wherein interim progress intervals occur. At the end of each assessment period, teachers will take an internal survey to answer questions similar to the ones asked on the NYC School Survey for Common Core Shifts in Literacy and and Common Core Shifts in Math. At a minimum, 1.5% positive gains are projected in the teachers responding to each of the questions included in the survey by Jan 2019. Additionally, 33% of students in the senior cohort will have passed the necessary Regents exam to garner the Advanced Regents Diploma. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Via item analysis on midterms, January Regents, Final Exams, post-teacher analysis surveys, and percentage of students earning an Advanced and Chancellor's Arts-Endorsed Regents Diploma by June 2019. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review, the school received a Quality Review Rating of Well-Developed for Indicators 1.4 (Structures for a positive learning environment, inclusive culture, and student success), 3.4 (A culture of learning that communicates and supports high expectations). Additionally, the 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot reflects that there was an increase of 9.1% for the Post-Secondary Enrollment Rate (6 Months) going from 62.9% (2016) to 72% (2017). 2. Despite the 9.1% in Post-Secondary Enrollment Rate (6 Months) over the past year, Fordham High School for Arts has decided to continue to focus on the percentage of students enrolled in college upon graduation. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, administration will work with staff to produce a school culture in which students feel challenged by their teachers and peers resulting in a 2% increase in the graduation rate. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? By using IO Education, students, teachers, parents, and counselors are able to see the progress (or lack thereof) to develop action plans in order to build awareness and strategic guidelines to increase student credit accumulation. All students September 2018 - June 2019 All Lead Teachers; Students; Parents; Counselors Moreover, The school partners with universities to provide college nights, college level courses and college intern mentors to support students’ including parents’ logistical and emotional preparation for college and career. Plan and host monthly college nights for parents and students Identifying teachers to sponsor extracurricular activities. We continue supporting the yearbook, National Honor Society and Lunch learns as extended learning opportunities and have introduced new clubs such as the book club, health and fitness club, drama club, computer science and the poetry club. The clubs will be sponsored on different days so that students can participate in more than one club. Seniors and Juniors September 2018 - June 2019 Guidance Counselor, Social Workers, and Data Specialist All students September 2018 - June 2019 Administration and Lead Teachers Use Naviance and excel to track and monitor college applications and acceptance results for both 2-year and 4-years colleges and universities Seniors September 2018 - June 2019 Social Workers, Guidance Counselors, Data Specialist 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The CAT, Physical Education and Academic Departments plan to hold a “Parent Night.” Parents will be invited to take a class in their student’s respective disciplines and classes. In addition, interested faculty would also be invited to foster stronger relationships between parents and teachers. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 8  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Using College Access for All resources for the 2018-2019 school year, 10% of funds will go towards the purchasing of Naviance and will be dedicated to the OneGoal program. Additionally, up to $8,000 per session costs for the school's Guidance Counselor and two Social Workers will be allocated for them to prepare and host students and their families for the monthly College Nights and for students to complete their college application. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The school's Data Specialist will work with the Social Workers and Guidance Counselor to generate and analyze reports in Naviance in three times during the fall 2018 semester and in February 2019 and May 2019 of the spring semester. By September 2018, 100% of the senior cohort will have completed their personal statements for college and by October 2018, 100% will have uploaded their list of colleges to the Naviance platform. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Tracking tools available via Naviance for both application and acceptance rates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review, the school received a Quality Review Rating of Well-Developed for Indicators 4.1 (Support and evaluation of teachers through the Danielson Framework and analysis of learning outcomes) and 4.2 (Teacher teams engaged in collaborative practice using the inquiry approach to improve classroom practice). Additionally, the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot reflects an increase of 4% and 0.6% for students earning 10+ Credits in their 2nd Year for all students and students in the school's lowest third, respectively. 2. According to the 2016-2017 Framework and the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework Element in comparison to the borough and city average are: o o teachers collaborating across disciplines to ensure daily lessons are made relevant to students' everyday life the percentage of students earning 10+ credits in their 1st and 3rd years of high school Over the past year, there was a 4.7% drop in the percentage of students earning 10+ Credits in their 1st Year for all students and a 5.3% drop in the percentage of students earning 10+ Credits in their 1st Year for students in the School's Lowest Third. Likewise, there was a 1.6% and 3.9% drop in similar categories for students in their 3rd Year of high school. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, ongoing professional development will be provided so teachers can collaboratively use ongoing formative assessment tools to monitor and track student participation, understanding, and content specific skills will result in 3% increase in the course pass rate from the previous year. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers meet to review student work products to evaluate current pedagogical practices, implement differentiation strategies that are applicable for all classes, assess curricula alignment, and modify lessons and units based on data and student feedback. IEP/ELL students who haven’t passed NYS Regents Examinations September 2018- All faculty February 2019 Teacher teams meet several times weekly to study curriculum and inform pedagogy adjustments focusing on the goals of increasing Regents pass rate at college-ready standards. Teachers create individualized Action Plans for students for teachers to share in order to meet instructional goals including passing state exams and earning credit in the classroom. Math and ELA departments meet to review student operational and achievement data bi-weekly. Action plans are created on a bi-weekly basis to address gaps and promote growth where we see success. Math, ELA Departments, and SD During Prof. development 1x a week on Thursdays Once Quarterly Math, ELA departments and SD All faculty All Faculty Hold “Faculty Classes” during select common planning periods, in which teachers attend a class in one of the 5 arts discipline and/or Physical education. This will inform academic teachers about the content taught in each department developing deeper understanding across arts, academics and physical education and will thus open up more opportunities for collaboration. Engage in observations of teachers who possess exemplary pedagogical skills related to the implementation of formative assessment tools. Engage teachers in monthly scholarship data meetings to analyze patterns and trends in student performance so as to develop next steps to ensure students are successful in class. Create and schedule credit intervention courses via the school's after-school program (Project SOAR) 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All students Once Teachers, Guidance Counselor, and Social Worker All students quarterly Once a month Teachers, Administration Assistant Principal/Data Specialist and Principal September through May Assistant Principal and Social Worker 1  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will collaborate with families to support students from all angles using platforms such as EngradePro, Kinvolved, and ClassDojo to promote communication and involvement within the school community. Additionally, teachers will utilize Parent Teacher Conferences as an opportunity to partner with families with the goal of student success by working together to create targeted next steps. Teachers also create letters for parent involvement at the outset of the year, family surveys about home environment, and newsletters to keep all parties involved of the learning happening in the classrooms at FHSA. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Continued guidance in the analysis of lessons/units of study and the formative assessments used in lessons/units for differentiation (struggling as well as advanced students) ensuring alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards Student work analysis to adjust instruction and differentiation   Opportunities for teachers to work with coaches and partners in a small group setting to develop, review, and ensure that assessments are of high quality  Designing classroom structures to teach executive function skills along with academic content   Per-session costs for the school's after-school Project Soar program and training rate for teachers to engage Infusing technology as a tool for differentiation, collaboration, and assessment in the school's August Summer Teacher Institute Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Weekly, Monthly and Quarterly meetings with partners and key stakeholders to assess the efficacy and implementation of formative assessments and growth of collaboration. At the end of each marking period, the scholarship rate will be 93% or higher across the school. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship Data as measured by STARS and EngradePro. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, the school achieved a 94% 4-Year Graduate Rate and a 94.4% 6-Year Graduation Rate. Furthermore, the College and Career Preparatory Course Index increased by 3% from 72% (2016) to 75% (2017) and the 4-Year College Readiness Index increased by 25% from 40% (2016) to 65% (2017). 2. Although the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot reflects a 3% increase in the school's College and Career Preparatory Course Index, the school's administration, faculty, and staff believe strongly improving students College Readiness by offering them the necessary coursework needed to ensure that students are able to obtain acceptance into their preferred college or university. Therefore, the school will continue to focus on the percentage of students who graduate college and career ready. For the 2017-2018 academic year, the school will establish partnerships with the Syracuse University Project Advance (SUPA), College Access for All, and Computer Science For All to ensure that students have taken a college level course. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school leaders ( including teacher leaders) will create and implement a professional development plan that builds teacher's capacity to support coherent instruction and build on the school's instructional focus, resulting in a 2% increase in teachers improving one performance level reflected in Danielson Component 1E and a 2% increase for students on high stakes examinations (state) for the 2018-2019 school year. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Use data and inter-visitations to identify teacher goals and assess instructional effectiveness. All faculty September 2018 - June 2019 All faculty (Specifically Lead Teachers) Support student and adult learning through partnering with universities to provide college nights, college level courses and college intern mentors to support students’ including parents’ logistical and emotional preparation for college and career. All faculty, students and parents September 2018 - June 2019 All faculty (specifically Guidance department) All faculty Lead Teachers September 2018 - June 2019 September 2017 - June 2018 All faculty SWDs, ELLs, ESLs, and other subgroup pops Promote continuous improvement in teaching and learning at the school and department levels by using Masteryconnect to develop SMART Goals and utilizing common planning periods to meet or exceed departmental goals with an emphasis on sub-populations of students. Lead Teachers who attend Professional Development sessions work to use the resources received from LCI, IFL, and Mastery Connect to analyze assessment data and create instructional change strategies targeted as supporting highest need students. Lead Teachers then take what they have learned in these sessions and turnkey them to the whole staff to build consistent school-wide practices. Monitor Progress in alignment of curriculum, instruction and assessment using the data generated from Masteryconnect to inform their pedagogical practices, e.g. develop goals for students, adjust and refine their instructional plans based on data. Enroll students in a Syracuse University Project Advance (SUPA) college level English course. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement All faculty September 2018 - June 2019 Administration Students in the Senior Cohort December 2018 Administration, Social Worker, English Teacher How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. 4  In order to educate parents during Title I PA meetings, Lead Teachers are invited to attend as facilitators. During this time, the teachers are presenting information that further families’ understandings of classroom operations. This includes a session on calculator usage and Common Core Standards. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The use of Achievement Instructional Support from coaches and partners and ensuring the efficacy of Teacher Leaders during daily inter-visitations to assist administration in providing teachers with frequent, constructive, and timely feedback. Paying coaches, partners and per-session to teachers who oversee. We will also implement a new schedule to ensure more time for Professional Development and content specific meetings. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Collaborative Teachers and Effective Leadership will be achieved through classroom observations conducted by administration, teacher inter-visitations, departmental walk through, CCLS aligned curriculum, lesson plans which incorporate CCLS tasks, student work products and professional development surveys. Student performance on benchmark assessments and high stakes examinations will also factor into how the school community examines and tracks to understand success towards these goals. By January 2019, 100% of students identified to participate in the Project Advance program who are not currently in an Advanced Placement ELA course will have completed their applications and paid the subsidized course fee to enroll in the spring semester college level course. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship rate as measured by STARS and EngradePro. Additionally, an excel tracker to monitor student completion of applications. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review, the school received a Quality Review Rating of Well-Developed for Indicator 3.4 (A culture of learning that communicates and supports high expectations. Additionally, the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot reflects a 4-Year Graduation Rate of 94% and 94.4% 6-Year Graduation Rate. 2. According to the 2016-2017 Framework and the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework Element in comparison to the borough and city average is that 41% of parents/guardians responded that, since the beginning of the school year, they have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support the school in school-wide events. To address this need, FHSA has partnered with Kinvolved to increase parent engagement with teachers across content areas. By allowing access of parents to teachers through text messaging to inform of attendance records upcoming assignments, and to request parental support and attendance at school-wide events throughout the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In an effort to make parents and families feel more welcomed and encouraged with the school, there will be increased parent engagement with teachers to bridge language barriers, resulting in a 2% increase in parents who agree or strongly agree on the School Culture section of the NYC School Survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parents/Guardians have the opportunity to come and watch their student engage in the material. They will be given subject specific dates that will occur once a semester, particularly towards the end of a unit when more projects and discussions occur. Parents Instructors of the class as well as department lead Lead Teachers, students, parents, counselors Ongoing throughout the year until June 2019 Ongoing throughout the year until June 2019 Students who receive 65 or below on 2 nd report card of semester All students one day between October 2018 to November 2018 SWDs, ELLs, ESLs and other subgroups Ongoing throughout the year until All Staff Teachers Teachers, Families SWDs, ELLs, ESLs June 2018 Ongoing throughout the year until June 2019 Developing an action plan that includes outreach to parents, a strong sense of community is fostered as teachers in all content areas maintain relationship with families in the school community through consistent outreach via phone, email, PupilPath, or scheduled meetings ensure all students are supported and a sense of team building and nurturing is evident throughout the academic year. During our Parent Association meeting we inform our parents of upcoming events and encourage them to participate. The Creative Art Team, Physical Education and Academic Departments plan to hold a “Parent Night.” Parents will be invited to take a class in their student’s respective disciplines and classes. In addition, interested faculty would also be invited to foster stronger relationships between parents and teachers. Teachers call families weekly to inform them of students who have excessive absences, or are missing several homework’s in one week. Additionally, teachers communicate with families on a weekly basis for students to stay for extra help after school. Support staff will assist lead teachers in sending home regular progress reports and ensuring follow-up by student/families. By continuing communication with families of high-need students, teachers can work to ensure that effective practices are being supported at home. Teachers and families work together to provide students with strategies that will ultimately impact student achievement. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 7  If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We will continue our partnership with the Bronx Community Health Network to educate our parents on healthy options. We are also hosting a team building activity at the beginning of the school year with the families of our incoming freshman. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Teachers will work in collaborative groups to plan subject specific dates so parents can observe a class project.  Academic Workshops for parents (e.g. Parent Night and Family Day). In addition, interested faculty would also be invited to foster stronger relationships between parents and teachers.  Create a parent information and resource center for parents of Fordham High School for the Arts students  Per-session cost for after-school club advisors (NHS, Cheerleading, Student Council, Computer Science for All, Book Club, Poetry Club, and annual Art Productions. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019, at least 50% of the school after-school clubs will have had at least one parent volunteer in a school-wide event. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. After-school club sign in sheets for parent/family member volunteers for school-wide events. Each club advisor and/or club executive board's secretary will be responsible for keeping record of parent volunteers to share at the school's monthly School Leader Team Meetings. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students at risk of scoring below the approved passing grade on state assessments Students at risk of scoring below the approved passing grade on state assessments Students at risk of scoring below the approved passing grade on state assessments Students at risk of scoring below the approved passing grade on state assessments Students identified through their IEP mandated services Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Interactive Writing, Blended Learning, 60 minute block of instruction Blended Learning, 60 minute block of instruction Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group, one-to-one During the school day Small Group, one-to-one During the school day 60 minute block of instruction Small Group, one-to-one During the school day 60 minute block of instruction Small Group, one-to-one During the school day Counseling by Social Worker and/or counselor by caseload Small Group, one-to-one During the school day 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are twenty one students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in Temporary Housing will be provided with counseling services to ensure that the students have the opportunity to progress academically. Counselors will meet with students and parents upon return to school to address any issues/concerns and to orient students back to the school environment. Counselors will support them with collecting classwork and homework assignments. They will be encouraged to report to the counselor on issues they may be facing such as traveling, peer pressure, social and emotional issues. Counselors will follow up with the students' teachers, counselor at the shelter, attendance team at the school to make sure that student is on task with school work, homework, any missing assignments, and monitor attendance to ensure that they meet the state requirement of 90% attendance rate. Counselors will work with student to complete the graduation requirement worksheet to inform them of their academic progress and next steps. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Fordham High School for the Arts school quality review report for 2015-2016 was rated “well-developed” and on its New York State Education Department’s Report Card deemed in “good standing”. Professional Development focus: ● Outreach to Human Resources, Teach for America and Teaching Fellows organizations to recruit highly qualified teachers ● Continued Inter-Visitations/Cycle of Feedback ● Deeper Understanding of Webb and Hess’s Depth of Knowledge Cognitive Matrix* ● Further development of CCLS (i.e. Performance Tasks, Cross-Curricular Alignment, and Looking at Student Work Products) ● Cross-Curricular connections to theme-based performance project ● Understanding by Design (UBD) – Backwards planning for units of study* ● Data Analysis* ● Development of Summative End of Year Assessments ● Development of Summer Assignments 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). 2  We will continue to provide professional development in CCLS and related “best practice” and “promising practice” strategies to encourage teacher retention. Teachers including Lead Teachers will continue to participate in school, Citywide, and Internal Professional Development sessions on Danielson Framework and CCLS, Writing Argumentative Essays and Depth of Knowledge to support teachers in their efforts relative to curriculum development. In addition, new teachers will participate in the following: ● Summer Institute ● Chancellor’s Professional Development ● Weekly Professional Learning Committee (PLC) Meetings ● Weekly Common Planning Meetings ● Weekly Special Education Meetings ● Weekly Danielson Professional Development (Component Foci: 1a, 1e, 2a, 2b, 3b, 3c, 3d, and 4e) ● Teacher Leader Program (TLP) Meetings ● School/Partnership Meetings ● Blue Engine Meetings Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). 3  N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Fordham High School for the Arts has a school local measures committee that is comprised of eight members of the school community, who are responsible for reviewing assessment data to identify areas of strength and areas for improvement. These areas of strength and areas for improvement are used to determine which assessments will be used for measures of student learning. Identified areas of improvement are reviewed and communicated to teachers after which, teacher leaders and administration design professional development for the academic school year, such as:  Chancellor’s Professional Development  Weekly Professional Learning Committee (PLC) Meetings  Weekly Common Planning Meetings  Weekly Special Education Meetings  Weekly Danielson Professional Development (Component Foci: 1a, 1e, 2a, 2b, 3b, 3c, 3d, and 4e)  Teacher Leader Program (TLP) Meetings 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5e Section 5 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 310,444 N/A N/A N/A 2,617,578 4  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent 5  representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Fordham High School for the Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Fordham School for the Arts will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; 7  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  Title I Priority and Focus Schools and the parents of students served in the Title I program must jointly agree upon the use of these additional funds to support increased parent engagement/education to enable parents to effectively support their child’s learning.  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 8  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress;  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Fordham High School for the Arts, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education (ESSA) Act; I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by:  conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 9     convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by:  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 0   advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with The Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to         learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities attend school regularly and arrive on time; complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn. 1  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 10 School Name Fordham High School for the Arts School Number 437 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Iris Blige Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Toni Capriglione Teacher/Subject Area Nicholas Verrillo / SPED Teacher/Subject Area Khrystie-Ann Clark / English Related-Service Provider Alyson Weaver Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Michael Johnson, Jr. Coach N/A School Counselor William Daley Parent Jennie Perez Parent Coordinator N/A Field Support Center Staff Member Anita Bushi Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 2  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 357 Total number of ELLs 15 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.20% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 4 3 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Fordham High School for the Arts administers diagnostic examinations in ELA, Mathematics, Science and Social Studies for all grade levels. The insight that the data provides about our ELLs includes deficiencies in both literacy and content area skills for 75% of our current ELL's. The pedagogical staff has developed intervention strategies, such as R.U.N. annotations, the Hochman Writing Program and close reading of text to hone in on the required skills/content aligned to CCLS that needs to be further developed to increase student proficiency levels. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 3  Teachers receive extended professional learning sessions each week geared towards supporting ENL students in the core content areas. Additionally, academic intervention sessions are provided to all ENL students via lunch-and-learn sessions and after-school. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Fordham High School for the Arts' focus for the 2017-2018 school year is to build upon the foundations we have developed in implementing the Common Core Learning Standards with an infusion of technological usage via our iLearnNYC program to more effectively individualize and differentiate instruction within the context and framework of a rigorous, standards-based curriculum. Through the effective planning and usage of technology, the achievements of all students will be continually monitored. Detailed information on each student about specific learning needs and daily direct intervention monitored through the various technology programs and platforms at the school (i.e., Datacation, Engrade, MasteryConnect, and iLearn) will help students attain mastery. Extensive differentiated strategies, techniques and learning modalities need to be developed, incorporated, and utilized so that learning is not repetitive, but will have a fresh presentation and rigorous content. Technology usage will facilitate immediate feedback and data for students and teachers. Technology will also facilitate the creation of appropriate learning increments and level/complexity to meet student needs. Technology will facilitate interactive learning where students learn by doing and by giving and getting continuous responses. An additional assessment of teacher and student progress involves looking at student work at regularly scheduled intervals in Teacher Team Meetings. Establishing a cohesive and comprehensive research based plan for professional development, collaborative planning, and informed decision making utilizing data, and regular assessment with meaningful feedback is key for the successful implementation of our focus. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Teachers of ENL students meet with ENL students during lunch-and-learn sessions twice a week and the ENL instructor provides after-school academic intervention for all ENL students twice week. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data patterns across proficiency levels have revealed that reading and writing are the highest deficiencies across all grade levels. All current ELL's at Fordham High For the Arts are at the expanding level with deficiencies in writing. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Every Thursday teachers engage in extended professional learning sessions to review and analyze school-wide data. The ENL Coordinator and ENL instructor these sessions will all faculty to ensure that teachers of ENL students are aware of instructional strategies to support ENL students. Additionally, the ENL instructor meets weekly with the English and Social Studies Department to review student work and make necessary curricula adjustments to ensure ENL students are improving their reading and writing skills. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students 4  regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction is delivered through the: a. Organizational models - ICT (Co-teaching) and Integrated ENL courses. The program model is ungraded, heterogeneous groupings and students are of mixed proficiency levels. Other programmed courses in Integrated Co-teaching ENL courses are in English and Social Studies for former ELL's that require an additional of 90 minutes in ELL transition support. The school also offers a stand alone ENL course for ELL students. b. TBE program. If applicable. Fordham High for the Arts does not have a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. Fordham High for the Arts does not have a DL program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? All ELL students receive the mandated minutes of instruction according to their level of English proficiency as per CR Part 154 in ELA and Social Studies content areas. Entering ELLs receive a minimum of 3 units of study (540 minutes of ESL instruction); Entering and Emerging ELLs receive the minimum of 2 units of study (360 minutes of ESL instruction); Transitioning and Expanding ELL students receive 1 unit of study in ESL (180 minutes of instruction); and Commanding ELL students receive 0.5 unit of study (90 minutes of ESL instruction). All instruction is delivered by a certified ESL teacher and a general education teacher in ELA or Social Studies Monday through Friday during the regular school day. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Instructional programs with high levels of rigor and support result in higher academic achievement for ELLs. Effective strategies used across all content areas include: differentiation, small group instruction, explicit academic vocabulary instruction, scaffolding (modeling, bridging, contextualization, schema building, metacognition development, text re-presentation). Our school focus is on reading and writing across all content areas. Studies show that native language development accelerates literacy gains in both the native language and English. As such, we offer language development and support for content instruction in the native language (or with native language support). In addition as an Arts school we seize every opportunity to establish an infusion of the Arts within the content area. The ESL teacher works collaboratively with the content area teachers in social studies, science and mathematics. This year the NYCDOE instructional focus as outlined in the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) is on reading and analyzing informational texts and writing opinions and arguments in response to texts across the content areas of ELA, math, science, social studies and the Arts. These Instructional supports are enhanced through the use of software programs such as Achieve 3000, Eduware, iLearnNYC, Write to Learn, and Castle Learning. The programs provide lessons which are differentiated to meet the students varying levels of ability and offer support in the development of language skills in the modalities of listening, speaking reading and writing. These are reinforced in every lesson. Lessons are also scaffolded in several ways, allowing all students multiple entry points and opportunities for success. Students work either independently or in homogeneous or heterogenous groupings depending on the task as well as their abilities. Students also have access to bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL's are evaluated in their native language. ELL's have the option to participate in alternative assessments in their native language. This is facilitated in all content areas as all ELL students are provided with the opportunity to sit in class assessments as well as the NYS Regents examination in their native language. ELL students have the option of testing in their native language and are given this opportunity to do so in class assessment as well as on State assessments. The rationale behind this approach is that we believe that proficiency in the native language supports efficiency in the second language acquisition process. 5  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiated instruction for ELL subgroups: a. SIFE – SIFE students are grouped based on their skills to receive intervention during the school day as well as for additional instruction during and after school and also in the school's Project SOAR Saturday programs. SIFE students are supported through the push in model in their content area classes. Student progress is assessed each marking period in order to evaluate and revise interventions as appropriate. Students work in small homogeneous groups for teachers to ensure that students grasp concepts and in heterogeneous groups to encourage participation in discussions with peers in order to support their comprehension of a given topic or assignment. Teachers across all content areas use research-based instructional strategies to include: activating prior knowledge, providing a print-rich environment, engaging students in hands on activities, using reliable props, model activities, activating higher order thinking skills through sorting, categorizing, charting, diagramming and also through explicitly teaching vocabulary. b. NEWCOMERS – The primary objective is to simplify language while amplifying the content. Students are provided with hands-on demonstrations, opportunities for role play, journal writing, using native language or pictures and also using the workshop model to scaffold basic skills in language development. This form of intensive instruction approach prepares ELLs for ELA testing in not only the NYSESLATs but aslo the NYSED ELA Regents examinations. c. ELLs receiving service 4-6 years – explicit vocabulary instruction, intensive academic literacy skills building d. LONG TERM ELLs (6+ years) – The focus is on developing social and emotional support in the language acquisition process. This is in addition to all the other instructional services provided to all other ELLs. Long term ELLs also receive support through scaffolding and differentiation of tasks and class activities. e. Native language support is offered in all classes through the use of Bilingual glossaries, bilingual text books, translations, computer language programs and software to support our students during their transition process. Former ELLs at the commanding level are permitted to receive testing accommodations for up to two years after testing out on the NYSESLAT. ELL strategies in instruction continue in all content area classes. Small group settings, extension of testing time, teacher collaboration on instruction and monitoring of ELL students progress continue. Additionally, Former ELLs receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL for 2 years after testing out. f. Students with Disabilities – ELLS with disabilities are appropriately served as per the student’s IEP. In order to ensure that teachers of SWD ELLs are providing the most appropriate instruction for them, the ESL, ELA and content area teachers collaborate to ensure that each SpEd ELL is afforded instruction appropriate to his/her language and learning needs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? In order to provide ELL-SWD with access to academic content areas and accelerate their English language development, teachers implement the following instructional strategies: grouping, activating prior knowledge by building background, providing a print rich environment, engaging students in hands on activities, using props, model activities, manipulatives, activating higher order thinking skills through sorting, categorizing, classifying, sequencing, charting, diagramming, teaching context clues skills and also explicitly teaching vocabulary. Instruction is also supported through the use of software and online programs such as: iLearnNYC, Castle Learning, Achieve 3000, Write to Learn and Eduware. The software programs are also designed to address the needs of ELL-SWD as they provide differentiation of tasks and activities. Students are evaluated through the use of level set testing and activities are generated to meet their specific instructional needs. Universal Design for Learning strategies are utilized in all areas to support student learning. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school makes every effort to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWDs within the least restrictive environment. Our certified ESL teacher's schedule is flexible enough to allow them to provides ESL instruction to ELLs during the regular school 6  day(through regularly scheduled classes as well as through Lunch & Learn sessions). Additionally, they are able to collaborate with the Special Education team, and grade inquiry team to monitor individual ELL-SWD's progress in core subject classes and by grade. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, Math, Global Studies, Science, & other subject matter are provided through after school programs and Saturday programs (PROJECT SOAR). They are designed to achieve the following: a. Literacy Development across the content areas (All teachers are reading teachers-not just content instructors) b. Use of technology, visual, auditory, and tangible materials regarding the delivery of instruction c. Strong native language support for beginning students who have recently arrived to the country d. Peer tutoring Program e. Lunch & Learn Program f. Components of the workshop model are used in all core subject classes All interventions are offered in English with strong native language support. Both ELL teachers work closely with content area teachers to provide best teaching practices and strategies for our English as a Second Language students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Programs that will continue to be implemented will include Achieve 3000, a software program which is used to determine the reading levels of students, then generates differentiated activities at the students level with the goal of advancing the reading and comprehension skills. The program was recently modified to further incorporate a more specific design for differentiation in instruction. Eduware, another software program, engenders participation from students, building confidence while at the same time supporting development of their reading and speaking skills. We believe that enhanced usage of these programs with our ELL population will continue to yield positive results on the NYSESLAT. We also provide ELLs with additional support through the use of the co-teaching models in content areas other than ELA. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At the moment we have not discontinued any programs, rather we revise and revamp the use of current programs. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. a. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. ELL students are invited to participate in all PSAL activities, student government, National Honor Society, etc. Throughout the regular school day ELL receive service as per the CR Part 154. They participate in the stand alone and integrated ENL program and in most cases receive above and beyond the minimum service hours requirements. Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning students receive an average of 375 minutes weekly, while Expanding and Commanding students receive a minimum of180 minutes each for ESL and ELA respectively. ELLs are encouraged to attend to tutoring, enrichment, athletic and general school activities. All communications, flyers, notifications to parents/students are distributed in English and in students’ native language. We also conduct parental outreach through K-12 Alerts (automatic phone call system), which is also done in the students native language. b. ELLs receive after school and supplemental services through Title III funding. Tutoring sessions have been set up for ELLs in their senior year who are deficient in one or more NYS Regents examination. Scheduled classes include Global history, United States history and ELA as these ELL students prepare for the January and June Regents Examinations. Each class/course lasts for 11 weeks and are held 2 times per week for three hours after school and on Saturdays. Project SOAR as it is called is designed as a credit intervention program as well as a Regents preparatory course. The ESL instructor provides support for the ELL student as she works collaboratively with the social studies and ELA teacher. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. 7  Instructional materials include: list of texts include -Visions, edge, Side-by-Side, Classics (No Fear Shakespeare), adapted readers, computer programs such as iLearnNYC, Castle Learning Online, Eduware and Achieve 3000. Bilingual texts, dictionaries and glossaries are also available for ELL students. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided in all content area classrooms. Resources include: bilingual glossaries, bilingual classroom, libraries, bilingual texts, audio/visual materials, translations. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required services support and resources correspond to our ELL population’s ages and grade levels. The curriculum is aligned to the NYS Common Core Learning Standards, which embeds grade and age appropriate standards. As the ESL teachers plans and designs lessons for the ELL students close attention is give to the learning goals for each student and benchmarks are established which will be used to closely monitor the progress of the ELL student. These benchmarks are based on what is age and grade appropriate as per the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials include: list of texts include -Visions, edge, Side-by-Side, Classics (No Fear Shakespeare), adapted readers, computer programs such as iLearnNYC, Castle Learning Online, Eduware and Achieve 3000. Bilingual texts, dictionaries and glossaries are also available for ELL students. In addition, as a co-located school the campus philosophy is inclusive in areas such as College Now courses, Physical Education, PSAL and intramural sports. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The ELL coordinator and members of the ELL team are responsible for overseeing the following activities for newly enrolled ELL's at the beginning of the school year: Student Orientation session, Summer Reading Packages(Designed with ELL's students needs), School/Campus tour, Student auditions in the Arts. Incoming ELL's also participate in Freshmen Surveys to determine their preference for the Arts majors. Letters/correspondence/school materials are sent home in the native language of the student. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Language electives offered to ELLs include Spanish and French. Both courses have an online component to it via the iLearnNYC platform. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Fordham High School for the Arts does not have a Dual Language Program. Therefore, answers to this above questions are not applicable at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 8  The ESL teachers and designated pedagogues attend PD offered by the OELL, RSETAC, QTEL. All school personnel including Assistant Principal, secretaries, guidance counselors, office staff, are trained in ELL identification and ELL instructional strategies in order to fully identify and support our ELLs at beginning and throughout the school year on Thursdays when students have an early release through the school's SBO. Prior to the start of the school year, the entire pedagogical staff at Fordham High School for the Arts engaged an intensive week-long professional development from August 28, 2017 to September 1, 2017. Professional Development Topics included the following: -Use of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) strategies -Depth of Knowledge (DOK) -Developing Learner Active Technology Infused (LATI) classrooms -Understanding by Design (UbD) Teachers also engage in Professional Development on the 1 st and 3 rd Thursday of each month that focus on the following topics: -School's instructional focus (Discussion and Questioning Techniques) -Strategies to engage ELL students in discussion (use of sentence starters, sentence stems, access to pre-planned questions in advance of the lesson) -Close Reading Strategies/Methods to Support ELLs -Using Visual Diagrams in Mathematics to support ELL instruction -Hochman Writing Method The topics discussed during the aforementioned professional development workshops will continue to be addressed on the Chancellor's Conference Days: -November 8, 2016 -January 31, 2017 -June 8, 2017 Teachers of ELLs receive an extensive week-long training a week before school starts that is facilitated by consultants hired within the NYCDOE that addresses the following instructional topics: -Use of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) strategies -Depth of Knowledge (DOK) -Developing Learner Active Technology Infused (LATI) classrooms -Understanding by Design (UbD) -School's instructional focus (Discussion and Questioning Techniques) -Strategies to engage ELL students in discussion (use of sentence starters, sentence stems, access to pre-planned questions in advance of the lesson) -Close Reading Strategies/Methods to Support ELLs -Using Visual Diagrams in Mathematics to support ELL instruction -Hochman Writing Method Teachers also receive ongoing professional development and participate in workshops sponsored by the DOE via OELL and school throughout the academic year. Content teachers meet with the ESL teacher and Coordinator on a weekly basis to ensure that curricula is aligned to CCLS during Common Planning Meetings and after-school on Thursdays. Information from professional development sessions are turn keyed to non-pedagogic staff during our early release day, Thursdays. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. 9  We provide our staff with the following supports to assist them with their work with ELLs. To assist ELLs with transition from middle to high school the school creates a student profile of each ELL student which is shared among the support team. Background information is gathered from ATS as well as student bio/file(cumulative record). The information gathered is used to develop a spreadsheet which is compiled in-house and provides a snapshot on the student. It includes each ELL student's OSIS number, grade level, official class, years of service, official language, modality report, NYSESLAT decision, SIFE status and X-coded status. A break down of their exam status is also available in this spreadsheet. Teachers receive training on how to use this data to support instruction as they determine the language needs of the ELL students and provide services accordingly. The ESL teacher also receives valuable information about the ELL students prior to entering high school. Once in high school the ESL teacher learns how to use the information from the ELL predictives to identify strengths and weaknesses in the student and is able to plan instruction based on the information gathered. Teachers and Administrators at Fordham High School for the Arts participate in weekly professional development workshops to specifically address the needs of ELL. 15% of these sessions are committed for all teachers while 50% is committed to ENL teachers to receive ELL-specific professional development. These workshops include a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELL's. Such workshops include but not limited to HESS cognitive rigor matrix, Depth of Knowledge, Close reading, parallel teaching and Use of technology to support ELL instruction. All powerpoint presentation, agendas, minutes and attendance documents are kept in the Principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited once a semester to meet with members of the LPT team on an individual basis to review student data and provide parents with updates on students' progress towards goals. Additionally, parents are provided resources and methods to assist them in supporting their son/daughter's language acquisition. In addition to parent teacher conferences initial parent orientations and quarterly progress meetings via family night, the LPT team meets with both parents and ELL students to discuss goals of the students academic program, the students language development progress, the students English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas as well as the performance arts. The school ensures that a qualified interpreter/ translator in the language or mode of communication, the parent or guardian best understands, is provided at all meetings. All attendance documentation are maintained in the ELL coordinator office. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school strives to raise parent awareness of services available to students and families within the community as well as to increase parent involvement in all school related operations. In addition to the ongoing New ELL-Parent Orientation, we conduct ELL parent orientation meetings twice a school year and schedule parent-teacher conferences as well as informational meetings for parents throughout the school year. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. ELLs students are also in receipt of additional academic intervention support services in Science and US History through the school's extended program. 0  1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Iris Blige, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: FHSA School DBN: 10x437 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Iris Blige Title Principal Michael Johnson, Jr. Assistant Principal N/A Parent Coordinator Toni Capriglione ENL/Bilingual Teacher Jennie Perez Parent Nicholas Verrillo / SPED Teacher/Subject Area Khrystie-Ann Clark Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Pauline Appleton School Counselor Carron Staple Anita Bushi Alyson Weaver Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Related Service Provider Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10-24-2017 10-24-2017 N/A 10-24-2017 10-24-2017 10-24-2017 10-24-2017 N/A N/A 10-24-2017 N/A N/A 10-24-2017 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x437 School Name: Fordham High School for the Arts Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Karina Diaz Social Worker Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodology used to assess the schools written translation is derived from its parents whose home language is other than English retrieved from the RHLA ATS Report. We also use the Parent Preferred Language Report (RCPL) and Adult Information Report (RADL) to determine parent's preferred written and oral language for communication. This information is reviewed and confirmed during student intake and parent orientation meetings. Communication with all parents are conducted in a language that is based on the parents' answers as per their completion of the home language survey or as indicated as the parent's most comfortable expression. Whether the communication to parents is written or oral, school personnel are available to translate school based information in the parent's preferred language. In addition, the school reaches out to the translation unit to provide parents with necessary translated documents. Each year, school staff track parent language preferences based on language written on the student's Blue Card and Parent Language Choice forms. Additionally, the school collects data on the parents preferred language via RAPL and UPPG screens in ATS for both ELL's and Non-ELL's. 4  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali French Fulani Italian Mandinka English Spanish 2 1 3 1 2 328 145 0.41 0.21 0.62 0.21 0.41 68.05 30.08 2 1 3 1 2 327 146 0.41 0.21 0.62 0.21 0.41 67.84 30.29 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A as of 9/28/2018 Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families 1. Parent/Student Welcome Back Letter 1. July 10, 2018 2. School Testing Calendar & all related testing documents 2. Handed to parents during SLT and PA meetings. We also mail these documents home in August. 3. Parent's Association Letters 3. Mailed home during the first week of September. Also handed out to parents during September Meeting. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All documents are disseminated to parents in English and the parent's preferred language using school staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All documents are disseminated to parents in English and the parent's preferred language using school staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All documents are disseminated to parents in English and the parent's preferred language using school staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 5  4. School Leadership Team Letters 4. Mailed home during the first week of September. Also handed out to parents during September Meeting. 5. Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements 5. All PTC announcements are mailed home during the last week of October and the first week of March. 6. In-house School Event Letters 6. All event letters are mailed home at least 10 days prior to the event. 7. After-School Program Information 7. All after-school program information is mailed home in September and February. 8. Letters from School Administration 8. All letters from Administration are mailed home immediately. All documents are disseminated to parents in English and the parent's preferred language using school staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All documents are disseminated to parents in English and the parent's preferred language using school staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All documents are disseminated to parents in English and the parent's preferred language using school staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All documents are disseminated to parents in English and the parent's preferred language using school staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All documents are disseminated to parents in English and the parent's preferred language using school staff and the Translation and Interpretation Unit. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide 1. Parent Orientation 1. June 2018 2. Parent-Teacher Conferences (Twice a year) 2. November 2018 and March 2019 3. Curriculum Night (fall and spring) 3. October/February 4. College Night (Two per cohort) 4. Is scheduled 3 times per semester. 5. Informal Interactions via telephone conferences conducted by Attendance Teacher, Guidance Counselor, and College & Career 5. Calls are made after each marking period. interpretation service(s)? 1. We have translation devices available to all parents at all meetings. 2. We have 4 or more staff members available to parents and staff for translation. They also are given instruction on how to call into the translation department. 3. On-site school staff provide language interpretation and translation services. 4. We have translation devices available to all parents at all meetings. 5. We have bilingual staff members available to all personnel for translation. We also hired a bilingual social worker to assist in this process. 6  Advisor (At least two calls made per semester) 6. Access - VR (4 timer per year = 1 time per cohort) 6. Access VR meetings in October and March for the special needs population. 6. We have translation devices available to all parents at all meetings. 7. IEP Meetings 7. Bi-annuals and Triennials 7. We have bilingual staff members available to all personnel for translation. We also hired a bilingual social worker to assist in this process. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school has a phone messaging system as well as IO Messenger to reach out to parents in the event of a school emergency. All communication to parents is translated. Additionally, parents are able to contact school personnel via IO Messenger which provides translation service for the parent to communicate in English. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The school communicates to staff/personnel during the Chancellor's Conference Day on September 4, 2018 the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. We hand out information from the DOE website to all staff members to meet compliance. The Language Access Coordinator meets monthly with school administration and faculty to review compliance items. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Within 30 days of a student’s enrollment, the primary language will be determined. If such language is not English and the parent requires language assistance in order to communicate effectively with the Department of Education and the staff at Fordham High School for the Arts, every attempt is made for the parent to be able to communicate effectively. The school will maintain an appropriate and current record of the primary language of each parent. Such information is maintained in ATS and on the students emergency card. The school provides translation and interpretation services to all parents. Parents may choose to rely on an adult friend/companion or relative for language and interpretation services. Students and other children (minors under the age of 18) may not serve as interpreters. Fordham High School for the Arts safety plan contains procedures for ensuring that parents in need of language access are not prevented from reaching the school’s administrative offices solely due to language barriers. The school will utilize all notification documents via the translation and interpretation unit intranet site. Additionally, 7  we utilize the Language Access Kit materials and resources to distribute to parents informing them of language translation and interpretation services offered by the New York City Department of Education. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The school will ask parents to complete surveys translated in the parent's preferred language during Parent-Teacher Conferences and Parent's Association Meetings meetings to gather feedback on the quality and availability of services provided to their son/daughter enrolled at the school. Additionally, the school will develop a focus group of parents inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school to gather feedback and best practices on support services provided to ELL and Non-ELL students. 8 
