 10X442 School Name: CELIA CRUZ BRONX HIGH SCHOOL OF MUSIC, THE Principal: JERROD MABRY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music 10X442 School Number (DBN): 321000011442 9-12 2780 Reservoir Avenue,Bronx, NY 10468 718-329-8550 Phone Number: 718-329-8559 Fax: Jerrod Mabry JMabry@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: Affinity Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Jerrod Mabry Tom Hall Pauline Stewart DerwinBlanco Shantii Quinones Edward Stewart Jesus Vasquez Cass Conrad District Information Fred Walsh Superintendent: 333 7th Avenue- 7th Floor fwalsh@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-356-3745 Phone Number: 212-356-7514 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Affinity FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Alexandra Anormaliza Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Jerrod Mabry Tom Hall Pauline Stewart Abby Tyndale ShantiiQuinones Edward Stewart Jesus Vasquez DerwinBlanco Debra Jaafary Patricia Gomez Miranda Ram *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Special Education Teacher Parent Representative Parent Representative CBORepresentative   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music Students, through an in-depth course of study and music performance, will emerge with the skills necessary to become positive, active members of society demonstrating talent, intelligence, caring, and a strong work ethic. Our partner, Lehman College, City University of New York, and all other partnerships will share in the commitment to   assist in the enhancement of educational instruction, musical training, and citizenship for all students. Through ongoing professional development, all members of the staff will be committed to personal and professional growth in the service to our students, parents, and community. Faculty, staff, parents, and the community will work together to sustain our educational philosophy and mission. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music is a small school for students seriously interested in continuing their music studies while pursuing a challenging academic course of study. In addition to music instruction, students are expected to complete course requirements that lead to an Advanced Regents Diploma, college acceptances, and career readiness. Program Highlights: Advanced Regents Diploma Program, double period blocks of Music Ensemble and various music electives; ensembles include various Bands, Jazz Band, String Orchestras, Full Orchestra, Piano and Choirs; Honors Courses, College Now; students participate in a minimum of two major performances yearly, and are evaluated by New York State School Music Association as soloists and ensembles. Celia Cruz is an AP for All school. In addition to the AP classes being offered on the campus we will be increasing the number of AP courses that we offer to 6. They are AP English Language, AP English Literature, AP US History, AP Micro-Economics, AP Environmental Science, and AP Spanish. We are also excited to offer AP classes to special education students and 9th graders for the first time. Collaborations / Partnerships / Initiatives: Exploring the Arts (ETA) Exploring the Arts (ETA) is a 501c3 non-profit organization founded in 1999 by Tony Bennett and Susan Benedetto. ETA's mission is to strengthen the role of the arts in public high school education. ETA's programs connect private funders, individual artists, and cultural institutions to Partner Schools to achieve greater equality of resources and opportunity for youth of all means and backgrounds. ETA currently serves 17 Partner Schools throughout New York City’s five boroughs and in East Los Angeles. STOKED Mentoring Stoked Mentoring is a unique organization that develops innovative programs exposing "at risk" youth and their mentors to action sports as a means to develop and foster resiliency, determination and success. Responsible for developing the curriculum for each mentoring program/ season, Stoked recruits and trains program mentors and teachers/coaches, hand-matches mentor and mentee, manages the mentoring relationship for optimal results and oversees follow up post-season. The current programs are targeted towards teens 13 - 17 years old. Stoked Mentoring began during a snowboard trip in April 2004 when Founder and Executive Director, Steve Larosiliere, was inspired to create opportunities to expose “at-risk” youth to nature and the challenging sport of snowboarding, through a unique mentoring program. Two cohorts of 20 students each will learn to skateboard, surf, and snowboard and will do so four-six times per year per activity. Our partnership with STOKED began in 2014-2015. Teacher Leadership / Distributive Leadership Model: Teachers who have obtained leadership positions within the school either through through the Chancellor’s new Leadership Roles or volunteered to facilitate teacher teams, take on new responsibilities within the school, and use the distributive leadership model as a framework within this context to implement the mission and goals of their respective programs. A system for peer observation and inter-visitation for members of the teacher leadership team 0  and all faculty members was designed to foster growth of teachers, learners and school community towards these specific school goals. Teachers will observe for and model methods for strengthening practice in alignment with these goals. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school's special education population is twenty-three percent. All students are enrolled in ICT classrooms. We now have eight special education teachers co-teaching in the core content areas. Our ENL population is small with 27 students. Both special education students and ENL students receive instruction tailored to their individual needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Rigorous Instruction Celia Cruz is revising its curriculum through department teams to prepare students for courses offered as part of AP for ALL. During department teams, teachers are developing common scope and sequence, common department and school-wide rubrics and common assessments. The teachers of each course are collaboratively developing a common mid-year and final assessment that will be of high rigor and aligned to the Common Core State Standards. Each exam will be developed, administered, graded with the common department rubric, results analyzed by completing an itemized analysis, and curriculum adjusted based on student need. The curriculum adjustments will analyzed for effectiveness by completing a cycle of inquiry. By increasing the use of formative assessments, by checking students' progress collaboratively through common summative assessments and analyzing the effectiveness of the curriculum changes by completing a cycle of inquiry instruction in the classroom will become much more rigorous. Supportive Environment We believe that a supportive environment is essential to student learning. Celia Cruz supports students in a variety of ways. We ahave a guidance counselor that is assigned to grades 9-11 and a dedicated counselor for all senior needs from college advising to FAFSA completion. There is a dedicated computer lab where students can work on college applications. A SAPIS counselor provides services to identified students as well as presents workshops. Working with Ramapo for Children, we have implemented content circles in content areas meant to help students feel comfortable taking intellectual risks. We have a robust after-school program where students receive tutoring and homework help. We also have after school groups that meet. For example, we have girl's and men's groups that meet weekly, and a gender sexuality alliance (GSA) to support our LGBTQ students. We have expanded our AP course offerings to include ICT AP courses where special education students have equal access to college level instruction. Our focus this year is to continue supporting our students to increase AP course enrollment. Collaborative Teachers Teachers are participating in teacher teams using a "tuning" protocol to look at lessons and formative assessment planning within the lesson, giving each other feedback on the alignment of the assessments to the lesson objective, which is based off of the Common Core standards. The teachers then observe each others classes to ensure that this formative assessment is being used, and to observe how it is used in the classroom. Finally, the teachers debrief by using the describe protocol to look at student work and feedback that was associated with this lesson. Our focus is to 1  increase the average score on Danielson component 3D (assessment). We expect to do this by increasing the use of assessments in classes. Effective School Leadership School leadership consists of the principal and two assistant principals. The school operates under a distributive leadership model. All administrators perform classroom observations. We have also provided teachers with expanded opportunities to become leaders within the school. In addition to our Model Teacher, we have nine teacher leaders who facilitate department and grade level teacher teams. Our focus this year is to continue expanding distributive leadership within the school as well as increase leadership scores on the School Survey Report. To do this the principal will be more visible by conducting two-thirds of observations and facilitating team leadership meetings and attending teacher team meetings. Strong Family-Community Ties Celia Cruz supports the family and community in a number of ways. Our parent coordinator is the liaison between parents and the school and assists with all issues. We have a community assistant that runs the school's GSA. Staff and parents are able to communicate quickly and effectively using the online JupiterGrades system. We have family events such as the Back to School Potluck and Family Days. Parents are invited to chaperone school trips. There are also parent workshops such as a financial aid workshop, applying for college workshops, and a FAFSA completion event. Our focus this year is to increase the FAFSA completion rate by 5%. Trust Trust amongst school community members is generally high. The school principal has an "open door" policy where teachers and students have direct access to the principal. The guidance department fosters trust with students and teachers gain trust by getting to know students on an individual basis. On the 2018-2018 School Survey Report parent-principal trust is 92%, parent-teacher trust is 94%, and teacher-teacher trust is 97%. Two areas of focus this year are student-teacher trust (78%0 and teacher-principal trust (76%). 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X442 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 427 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 40 4 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 87.0% % Attendance Rate 82.4% % Reduced Lunch 7.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 70.0% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 5.53 4% 25% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 95% 95% 94.0% 16.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 49 49 91.0% 4.9% 21.8% 22.5% 1.9% 4.4% 4 14% 8.2 N/A N/A 95% 96% 94.4% 20% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Celia Cruz High School historically has had a high graduation rate but a low college readiness index. In the 2017-2018 school our graduation rate was ninety-five percent. In addition, The 2015-2016 Quality Review and 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review (PPR) revealed the following strengths: Resource Allocation: Well-Developed PPR 1.3: "Staff programs include regularly scheduled time that is explicitly used for professional collaborations that are focused on school goals and improved teaching practice. Teachers have a variety of regularly scheduled meeting and team-oriented learning opportunities such as grade team meetings, subject specific departmental work, planning sessions, kid-talk discussions and attendance team work which directly results in students being engaged in challenging work." Goal Setting: Well-Developed PPR 3.1: "Data from various sources are used to set goals and benchmarks as well as determine plans for meeting them. Data is purposefully collected and analyzed over the course of the year to track the improvement of teaching and learning and raise student achievement." Teacher Teams and Leadership Development: Well-Developed QR 4.2- "Teacher teams systematically analyze key elements of teacher work including classroom practice, assessment data, and student work. Distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership." PPR 4.2- "The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry based professional collaboration including grade, department and self-selected teacher teams. In grade teams, teacher teams consistently analyze student data and student work for students they share or on a group of students whom they are focused on. For example, in February, teacher teams analyzed student data from summative assessment results." Monitoring and Revising Systems: Well-Developed PPR 5.1-"School leaders and faculty have a process in place to regularly evaluate and the use of organizational resources as evidenced by participation in CUNY professional learning around team facilitation and teacher leadership 4  programs. Additionally, the special education department receives support from Affinity Field Support Center to increase differentiation in lesson planning for students with disabilities." 2. In the 2017-2018 school year, only thirty-seven percent of our graduating students met the college readiness benchmark on both the CC English and Math Regents exams (CC Algebra, CC Algebra 2 or CC Geometry). Last year, our college readiness regents results for Math and English Regents were: A. CC English- 48/131= 37% B. CC Algebra-41/111= 37% C. CC Algebra 2-36/175= 21% D. CC Geometry-6/54= 11% In addition, 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review (PPR) revealed the following priority needs: Teacher Pedagogy: Effective PPR 1.2 -"Focus feedback to teachers on pacing, increasing student voice and creating even more student centered lessons. There were missed opportunities for student to student discussion in most classes observed. Consider including the question: “How do these skills fit in with our school wide vertical alignment?” Alignment to Advance Placement curriculum could further promote critical thinking and more rigorous engagement." Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across classes, as evidenced by an 8% increase in the number of students in the class of 2019 demonstrating college readiness on both the English and Math benchmarks from 37% to 45%. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Domain 1 unit and lesson plan development, reviews and feedback. All teachers 9/18-10/18 Principal, Assistant Principal During grade level teams in the first semester teachers participate in the inter-visitation cycle. This allows them to use protocols to tune lessons, observe lessons of other teachers on their team and debrief the lesson by looking at student work. The lens of their work for the first semester is how teachers are using formative assessment to adjust instruction. During grade level teams in the first semester teachers participate in the inter-visitation cycle. This allows them to use protocols to tune lessons, observe lessons of other teachers on their team and debrief the lesson by looking at student work. The lens of their work for the first semester is implementing best practices around using formative assessment to adjust instruction. All teachers 10/18-12/18 Assistant Principal, All teachers 3/18-5/18 Model Teacher & Grade Level Team Teacher Facilitators Assistant Principal, Model Teacher & Grade Level Team Teacher Facilitators During department teams teachers collaboratively develop, use and revise a common scope and sequence, rubrics and summative assessments. All teachers 9/18, 1/18, and 5/18 Assistant Principal & Grade Level Team Teacher Facilitators During department teams teachers complete an itemized analysis of the June Regents using the June Instructional Report. They use this information to make curriculum changes and determine an common area of focus based on where students struggled on the exam. All teachers 9/18-10/18 Assistant Principal, Department Team Teacher Facilitators, CUNY School Support Specialists During department teams teachers complete a cycle of inquiry to address their common area of focus based on the itemized analysis of the June Regents. All teachers 10/18-12/18 Assistant Principal, Department Team Teacher Facilitators, CUNY School Support Specialists During department teams teachers complete an itemized analysis of the common assessment given during mid-term exams in January or the January Regents. They use this information to make curriculum changes and determine an common area of focus based on where students struggled on the exam. All teachers 1/19-2/19 During department teams teachers complete a cycle of inquiry to address their common area of focus based on the itemized All teachers 3/19-5/19 Assistant Principal, Department Team Teacher Facilitators, CUNY School Support Specialists Assistant Principal, Department Team Teacher Facilitators, 6 analysis of the mid-term common assessment or January Regents. Grade and department team facilitators will meet weekly during their self-directed time with the Principal & Assistant Principal to plan and reflect on teacher teams. CUNY School Support Specialists Principal & Assistant Principal 9/18-6/18 All grade and department team facilitators Targeted teacher team facilitators will attend a teacher leadership PD with CUNY School Support Specialist to reflect on their work leading teacher teams. Targeted teacher team facilitators 9/18-6/18 CUNY School Support Specialists Targeted teachers attend domain specific PD with the CUNY School Support Specialists. This includes the CUNY School Support Specialist visiting the school for bi-monthly coaching visits with the teacher they are supporting. Targeted math teachers 9/18-6/18 Assistant Principal, CUNY School Support Specialists All students in the Class of 2019 who haven't passed the English Regents have been strategically scheduled to have English class during first period. Students in 1st period English 9/18-6/18 All students in the Class of 2019 who haven't passed the English Regents have been strategically scheduled to Regents Prep after-school. Students in CC English Regents Prep 9/18-6/18 Assistant Principal, 12th Grade English ICT Teachers Assistant Principal, After-School English Teacher 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Both Assistant Principals work with guidance counselors and the parent coordinator to track individual student progress and inform parents. The school hosts various parent events that allow parents to interact with teachers and school staff to better understand the expectations of NYS standards and how they can support their child at home. These events include a freshman orientation, back to school potluck, and AP parent meetings. In addition, the school hosts mandatory parent conferences for struggling students after the 1st quarter and 3rd quarters that allow the parent, student, guidance counselor and teachers to work together to identify why the student is struggling and determine how they can provide support to the student. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We strategically made schedule adjustments to the teachers C6 professional period assignment to allow our human resource of our teachers to develop formative assessment strategies that are aligned to the lesson objective during collaborative teacher teams, which meet during period 5 on Tuesday and Thursday. In addition, the teachers will work collaboratively on developing common summative assessments and curriculum adjustments on scheduled Wednesdays during period 5. The collaborative teacher team time is the teachers C6 professional period assignment. We will support after-school planning with teacher and supervisor per session. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other 7  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, we will effectively increase the level of rigor across classes, as evidenced by an 4% increase in the number of students in the class of 2019 demonstrating college readiness on both the English and Math benchmarks from 37% to 41%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Students will be taking a summative common assessments that are aligned to NYS Regents exams that are given in January as a Mid-Term. In addition, all students who are re-taking a Math or English CC Regents exam will take the January Regents. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. The school has developed a strong school culture that has allowed students to feel comfortable taking academic risks. According to the 2015-2016 Quality Review and 2017-2018 PPR: PPR-Indicated that there is a culture of "mutual trust and positive attitudes that supports the academic and social emotional growth of students and adults." QR-3.4 High Expectations-Well Developed "School leaders consistently communicate high expectations to the entire staff and provide training. School staff effectively conveys expectations connected to a path to college and career readiness and successfully partner with families. A culture of mutual accountability to support student progress toward college and career readiness." 2. On the Framework for Great Schools Report 2018, the lowest scores in the Supportive Environment sections were peer support for academic work at 58% along with personal attention and support at 57% . Our priority need will be to support AP teachers in 3. Celia Cruz strives to create and sustain a school and classroom culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. The school has a robust guidance department and an Assistant Principal of Organization that focuses on the needs of students. Examples of student based culture are monthly certificates of achievement from the Principal, weekly posting of excellent attendance, incentives for high performance, as well as recognition for "most improved" students and students are actively working to achieve success. We also have a SAPIS counselor who supports our students who have been identified as needing support with substance abuse. Finally, we work with the health professionals at the Montefiore clinic located in the basement in the Walton Campus to provide services to our students that includes counseling, check-ups and health education during our health classes. The attendance team meets weekly to review students attendance reports from ATS and schedule home visits for students who are exhibiting chronic absenteeism with the attendance teacher. In addition, all teachers are to follow the attendance plan that includes a ladder of outreach for individual students. The social and diverse needs of students will be supported by the development of groups that support the identity, interests, and opportunities to grow and develop social skills and capacity. The school will sponsor a campus-wide Gay-Straight-Alliance (GSA) to support the needs of the school’s growing and notably visible LGBTQ population. Research shows that GSAs contribute to positive academic outcomes, healthy social and emotional development of LGBTQ youth, and safety while providing a safe-haven for students to feel welcome, accepted, and at ease in the company of their allies. 9  During the 2017-2018 school year, Celia Cruz joined the AP for ALL. We used the support of this intuitive to support our AP teachers and to create vertical alignment within each department. This year, we are offering 6 different AP courses that included AP US History, AP Micro-Economics, AP English Language, AP English Literature, AP Spanish Language and Culture and AP Environmental. The school has begun to implement Restorative Justice practices to support our diverse student population and individual needs of our students. In addition, the school is supporting it's teachers in implementing specifically designed instruction (SDI) for individual and groups of students based on their IEP or assessment results with PD during teacher teams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, the school culture and learning environment will more effectively support the academic and personal growth of students, as evidenced by a 5% increase in the number of students who attend Celia Cruz and are taking AP courses, from 13% to 18%. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During department teams teachers collaboratively develop, use and revise a common scope and sequence, rubrics and summative assessments. All teachers 9/18, 1/18, and 5/18 Assistant Principal & Grade Level Team Teacher Facilitators During department teams teachers complete an itemized analysis of the June Regents using the June Instructional Report. They use this information to make curriculum changes and determine an common area of focus based on where students struggled on the exam. All teachers 9/18-10/18 Assistant Principal, Department Team Teacher Facilitators, CUNY School Support Specialists During department teams teachers complete a cycle of inquiry to address their common area of focus based on the itemized analysis of the June Regents. All teachers 10/18-12/18 Assistant Principal, Department Team Teacher Facilitators, CUNY School Support Specialists During department teams teachers complete an itemized analysis of the common assessment given during mid-term exams in January or the January Regents. They use this information to make curriculum changes and determine an common area of focus based on where students struggled on the exam. During department teams teachers complete a cycle of inquiry to address their common area of focus based on the itemized analysis of the mid-term common assessment or January Regents. All teachers 1/19-2/19 All teachers 3/19-5/19 Support students in using the online program Albert IO to support their work in their AP classes AP students 9/18-6/19 Support students in obtaining study skills to do well in AP classes by attending the Elevate education program training sessions AP students 11/18 Train all teachers on integrating study skills from the Elevate education program into their curriculum All teachers 11/18 Assistant Principal, Department Team Teacher Facilitators, CUNY School Support Specialists Assistant Principal, Department Team Teacher Facilitators, CUNY School Support Specialists Assistant Principal, AP Teachers Assistant Principal & Elevate Education Program Consultant Assistant Principal & Elevate Education Program Consultant The AP for ALL teacher representative will continue to attend the AP for ALL vertical alignment PD's and work with the Assistant Principal of Supervision to turn key the information to the teachers who facilitate department teams. Each department Assistant Principal of Supervision, AP for ALL, Department Team teacher facilitators 1 All teachers 9/18-6/19 team will continue to make adjustments to their scope and sequence to create vertical alignment. Participate in the Affinity Networks ICT Lab Site Program that will allow two ICT teachers to get instructional coaching and attend inter-visitations to visit classrooms of other ICT teachers in different schools in the Affinity Network. Both teachers will work with the Assistant Principal of Supervision to turn key the information to the other ICT teachers. Participate in the Affinity Networks CDOS PLC that will allow us to receive support in creating opportunities for all students to graduate with a CDOS credential. ICT Teachers 9/18-6/19 All students 9/18-6/19 AP teachers will receive instructional coaching and support from AP content leads. All AP teachers 9/18-6/19 Assistant Principal of Supervision, Affinity Network, ICT Teachers All administrators, guidance department, Affinity Network, Music Teachers, Special Education Teachers Prinicipal, Assistant Principals, and AP Content Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The guidance department will send home letters to the parents of each individual students informing them of the after-school tutoring programs, academic incentives, and extra-curricular programs to alert them of the program expectations and requirements. The school uses its online grading system of Jupiter Grades to monitor daily attendance and communicate with parents. In addition, the school makes daily outreach phone calls to parents if a student is absent. Parents and students are also invited to AP Family Night which allows AP teachers to present information about the AP courses that the school offers and requirements for taking the course. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The school will support this goal using AP for All funding. Funds will be used to purchase AP materials and provide per session to AP teachers for planning and development. Eight teachers will receive approximately 30 hours of per session over the course of the year. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  By February, 2019, the number of students enrolled in AP courses for the 2018-2019 school year will be at least 18% of students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The number of students enrolled in AP courses for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school has set up a structure in which all teachers participate in collaborative teacher teams during the school-wide lunch period. Last year, teachers worked collaboratively on developing department-wide rubrics, looking at student work to adjust curriculum and lesson, and using data from state-aligned exams to adjust instruction and develop Academic Intervention Strategies. In addition, The 2015-2016 Quality Review and 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review (PPR) revealed the following strengths: Teacher Teams and Leadership Development: Well-Developed QR 4.2- "Teacher teams systematically analyze key elements of teacher work including classroom practice, assessment data, and student work. Distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership." PPR 4.2- "The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry based professional collaboration including grade, department and self-selected teacher teams. In grade teams, teacher teams consistently analyze student data and student work for students they share or on a group of students whom they are focused on. For example, in February, teacher teams analyzed student data from summative assessment results." 2. Our credit accumulation data for 3rd year students last year was considerably less than for 1st and 2nd year students. The percentage of 1st year students who earned ten or more credits was eighty-nine percent and the percentage of 2nd year students was ninety-one percent. However, the percentage of 3rd year students who earned ten or more credits was only seventy-eight percent. This data trend extended to students in the lowest third for 3rd year students. The percentage of 1st year students in the lowest third who earned ten or more credits was eighty percent and the percentage of 2nd year students was eighty-four percent. However, the percentage of 3rd year students in the lowest third who earned ten or more credits was only sixty-two percent. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, effective teacher collaboration in teacher teams will build teachers capacity to support 3rd year students to increase the number of students who earned ten or more credits by three percent from seventy-eight percent to eighty-one percent. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During grade level teams, teachers will participate in an Special Education and ELL PD series to share best practices and support teachers in understanding the individual needs of this sub group of students. Grade team facilitators will meet weekly during their self-directed time with the Principal & Assistant Principal to plan and reflect on teacher teams. All teachers. 9/18 2/18 All teachers 9/18-6/19 Targeted teacher team facilitators will attend a teacher leadership PD with CUNY School Support Specialist to reflect on their work leading teacher teams. Targeted teacher team facilitators 9/18-6/19 Targeted teachers attend domain specific PD with the CUNY School Support Specialists. This includes the CUNY School Support Specialist visiting the school for bi-monthly coaching visits with the teacher they are supporting. Targeted teachers attend domain specific PD with the Affinity School Support Specialists. This includes the Affinity School Support Specialist visiting the school for bi-monthly coaching visits with the teacher they are supporting. Un-tenured teachers will participate in a professional learning community bi-monthly to reflect on their work and create a tenure binder. Targeted Math and Science teachers Targeted History and Special Education teachers Un-tenured teachers Targeted students are programmed to attend after-school tutoring in English, Math, Science and History. Targeted Students 9/18-6/19 9/18-6/19 10/18, 12/18, 2/18, 4/18, 6/18 9-18-6/19 All students and parents are able to use the school's online grading system of Jupiter grades to track student progress daily. All students 9-18-6/19 Targeted students are programmed to attend PM school to make up credits in English, Math, Science and History. Targeted Students 9-18-6/19 Assistant Principal, Model Teacher and Grade Team Teacher Facilitators Principal and Assistant Principal Principal, Assistant Principal and CUNY School Support Specialists Principal, Assistant Principal and CUNY School Support Specialists Principal, Assistant Principal and Affinity School Support SpecialisTts Assistant Principal Assistant Principal, Guidance Counselors, All teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, All teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Guidance Counselors, PM School teachers 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Both Assistant Principals work with guidance counselors and the parent coordinator to track individual student progress and inform parents. The school hosts various parent events that allow parents to interact with teachers and school staff to better understand the expectations of NYS standards and how they can support their child at home. These events include a freshman orientation, back to school potluck, and AP parent meetings. In addition, the school uses hosts mandatory parent conferences for struggling students after the 1st quarter and 3rd quarters that allow the parent, student, guidance counselor and teachers to work together to identify why the student is struggling and determine how they can provide support to the student. Finally, during grade teams teachers work together to collaboratively complete teacher reports that are used to write IEP's for students with a disability. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will all need to be relieved of their C6 period in order to participate in Teacher P.D. during period five. Two days a week teachers will meet in grade teams, and one day the department teams will meet, and two days will be self-directed professional time. ICT and ENL teachers will be allotted 20 hours of per-session per semester for additional collaborative planning time. All teachers will be allotted 10 hours of per-session per semester to make curriculum adjustments by incorporating data from last June regents exams, as well as from the mid-term common assessment. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 2019, effective teacher collaboration in teacher teams will build teachers capacity to support 3rd year students to increase the number of students who earned five or more credits to eighty-one percent. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. First semester credit accumulation data for 3rd year students. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school has set up a structure in which all teachers participate in collaborative teacher teams during the school-wide lunch period. Last year, teachers worked collaboratively on developing department-wide rubrics, looking at student work to adjust curriculum and lesson, and using data from state-aligned exams to adjust instruction and develop Academic Intervention Strategies. In addition, The 2015-2016 Quality Review and 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review (PPR) revealed the following strengths: Teacher Teams and Leadership Development: Well-Developed QR 4.2- "Teacher teams systematically analyze key elements of teacher work including classroom practice, assessment data, and student work. Distributed leadership structures are embedded so that there is effective teacher leadership." PPR 4.2- "The majority of teachers are engaged in structured, inquiry based professional collaboration including grade, department and self-selected teacher teams. In grade teams, teacher teams consistently analyze student data and student work for students they share or on a group of students whom they are focused on. For example, in February, teacher teams analyzed student data from summative assessment results." 2. One of the lowest component of Danielson ratings for our teachers is domain 3D. The average rating last year was 3.13. The school still has work to do in order to develop and use formative assessments during each lesson to track student progress more frequently. In addition, after reviewing teacher unit plans, teachers continue to struggle with assessing their students' progress throughout the lessons and unit and using that data to differentiate instruction. This has led a gap in credit accumulation and regents scores for general education students and students with a disability or ENL students. On the Framework for Great Schools Report 2018, the lowest area was effective school leadership at 2.99. Specifically, instructional leadership had the lowest scores. Next year, administration will be more involved by attending the weekly planning and reflection meetings with the teacher facilitators of grade and department teams to allow for more collaboration We will effectively build a clear vision for instructional leadership that will lead to an increase of 13% on the percentage of positive responses for the instructional leadership category under effective school leadership on the Framework for Great Schools report from 67% to 80%. This will be accomplished by increasing the number of observations completed by the principal. 8  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, effective school leadership will build teachers capacity to use assessment data to adjust instruction as evidenced in an increase in teachers performance in the Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3D (assessment) from 3.13 to 3.2. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The principal will conduct 83 of 124 observations this school year. All teachers 10/18-5/19 Princpal Common Professional Period: Provide one period on a bi-weekly basis during teacher’s common professional period (C-6) for teacher facilitators of the department teams and grade level teams to plan and reflect on team meetings with AP Fink and Principal Mabry. Department and Grade Team Teacher Facilitators 9/18-6/19 Principal and AP Fink During grade level teams in the first semester teachers participate in the inter-visitation cycle. This allows them to use protocols to tune lessons, observe lessons of other teachers on their team and debrief the lesson by looking at student work. The lens of their work for the first semester is how teachers are using formative assessment to adjust instruction. During grade level teams in the first semester teachers participate in the inter-visitation cycle. This allows them to use protocols to tune lessons, observe lessons of other teachers on their team and debrief the lesson by looking at student work. The lens of their work for the first semester is implementing best practices around using formative assessment to adjust instruction. Grade team facilitators will meet weekly during their self-directed time with the Principal & Assistant Principal to plan and reflect on teacher teams. All teachers. 10/18-12/18 Assistant Principal, Model Teacher and Grade Team Teacher Facilitators All teachers 3/19-5/19 Assistant Principal, Model Teacher and Grade Team Teacher Facilitators 9/18-6/19 Principal and Assistant Principal All teachers who are grade team facilitators Targeted teacher team facilitators will attend a teacher leadership PD with CUNY School Support Specialist to reflect on their work leading teacher teams. Targeted teacher team facilitators 9/18-6/19 Targeted teachers will participate in the observation cycle. They will receive a cycle of evaluative and non-evaluative feedback on how they are using assessments to adjust instruction. Targeted teachers 9/18-6/19 Principal, Assistant Principal and CUNY School Support Specialists Principal and Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 0  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The school will engage parents, families, and students through the School Leadership Team (SLT). At the SLT meetings, parents and students have an opportunity to engage with the CEP and give their feedback on CEP goals. The SLT meets monthly. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Teachers will all need to be relieved of their C6 period in order to participate in Teacher P.D. during period five. Two days a week teachers will meet in grade teams, and one day the department teams will meet, and two days will be self-directed professional time. ICT and ENL teachers will be allotted 20 hours of per-session per semester for additional collaborative planning time. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 2019, teachers performance in the Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3D (assessment) should increase from 3.13 to 3.16. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Administrative review of common assessments and updated curriculum. Teacher observations and tracking of 3D. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music works to develop strong family and community ties. The school survey indicates that there were 93% percent positive responses for outreach to parents and 79% parent involvement in school. The six month postsecondary enrollment rate for the school is 69.6% To increase postsecondary enrollment we want to increase parent involvement in the college application process, specifically our goal is to increase FAFSA completion from 85% to 90%. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will deepen our home-school partnership, as evidenced by a 5% increase in family participation in completing the FAFSA, from 85% to 90%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The school will hold a parent workshop specifically addressing the college process. Parents/ 10/18 Administration, guidance counselors. Guardians/ Students Students and families will receive the "Senior Year Checklist." Parents/ 10/18 Administration, guidance counselors. Guardians/ Students The school will perform outreach to colleges and volunteer organizations to provide students and families with opportunities to learn more about them. Parents/ 10/18-12/18 Administration, guidance counselors. Guardians/ Students The school will provide information to students and families regarding various city-wide college access events. Parents/ 9/18-6/19 Administration, guidance counselors. The school will hold workshops and host a FAFSA Completion Event 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Guardians/ Students Parents/ 10/18 Guardians/ Students Administration, guidance counselors. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Guidance counselors will require 45 hours of per session to plan and run the school events. Supervisor per session will be required for all events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 3  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 85% of students will have a completed FAFSA. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Data from guidance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During school hours, after school, and weekends. Online support via Jupiter Grades. Summer and PM School. One-to-one instruction, group and classroom instruction, tutoring. Ongoing Communication with parents on how to help their children at home. Online instruction. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students who are reading below grade level, at risk of not passing their English course, and juniors/seniors who have not passed the ELA Regents. Students with disabilities and ENL population are receiving individual and group instructions during the day and after school. All students currently enrolled in the school below, at grade level and/or above. Mathematics Middle School results for incoming students for those who are performing below grade level. Students who are struggling in their Mathematics courses After school instruction and Regents preparation to students who are identified as “at risk” of not graduating in four years or have failed the Regents multiple times. Credit Recovery Program. English courses during the school day are programmed according to the reading levels of students as identified formative and standardized assessments. “Push in” and “pull out” services are provided by the special education department as well as the ESL department. ICT teacher support for students with IEPs. Summer ELA/MathBridge Program is offered to incoming students. After school instruction and Regents preparation to students who are identified as “at risk” of not graduating in four years or have failed the Regents multiple times. One-to-one instruction, group and classroom instruction, tutoring. During school hours, after school, and weekends, lunch periods. Summer and PM School. 5  Science and those who have previously failed the Math Regents. Services are also available for students who are at or above grade level. All students enrolled in school. Students who are struggling in their science courses and those who have previously failed the Science Regents. High level science courses such as Physics and AP Bio classes are available for high performing students. Social Studies Low performing and students who have not passed the Global and/or US History Regents. All students currently enrolled in Global/US Saturday Academy is also offered to students in need of tutoring or Regents prep. Math courses are programmed according to the need and skill level of each individual student. “Push in” and “pull out” services are provided by the special education department as well as the ESL department. Summer Bridge Program is offered to incoming students. ICT support for students with IEPs. Regents preparation for students who are identified as “at risk” of not graduating in four years or have failed the Regents multiple times. Saturday Academy is also offered to students in need of tutoring or Regents prep. Science courses are programmed according to the need and skill level of each individual student. “Push in” and “pull out” services are provided by the special education department as well as the ESL department. ICT teacher support for students with IEPs. National Honor Society members conduct peer-tutoring for selected students. Regents preparation for students who are identified as “at risk” of not graduating in four years or have failed the Regents multiple times. Saturday Academy is One-to-one instruction, group and classroom instruction, tutoring During school hours, after school, lunch periods, weekends, summer and pm school. One-to-one instruction, group and classroom instruction, tutoring During school hours, after school, summer, pm school, weekends 6  History, Economics/Govt classes including on grade level or above. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students who are mandated for counseling, low attendance, low performing, and failed courses. Over-aged and under credited. Promotion and graduation-in-doubt students. All students receive social/emotional counseling. College and career counseling services are received through our guidance department. Crisis counseling services are ongoing through guidance counselors and CBO Monte Clinic. also offered to students in need of tutoring or Regents prep. Social Studies courses are programmed according to the need and skill level of each individual student. “Push in” and “pull out” services are provided by the special education department as well as the ESL department.Credit accumulation. ICT teacher support for students with IEPs. 1. Jupiter Grades: The online grading system used by the school that allows the school to track student attendance and performance in all of their classes. 2. Case Conferences: Students in the freshman and junior cohort that have been identified as struggling academically are scheduled to have a conference with their parents to discuss the academic issues they are having in their classes. 3. PM School for both credit recover and Regents Preparation. Building-wide YABC Program for overaged and under credited students. Individual, group, and classroom developmental lessons to address goal-setting, decision-making, social skills, and post-During school hours, after school, pm and summer school, Saturday academy. Conduct Individual, group, and classroom developmental lessons to address the needs ofthe student population. Referrals are made for students who are in need of Mental Health services. 7  secondary planning strategies. ● struggling academically/personally ● Help students identify short and long term goals ● Help students explore postsecondary options including college and career choices ● assist and engage parents in educational and career planning for their children ● assist students to connect career goals to educational goals ● establish support for students in Temporary Housing ● Note and study skills lessons ● Make Referrals for Students and Their Families, as needed 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 18 STH Students based on the Biographical and Address Reports on ATS. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. The school monitors the STH population regularly to ensure students receive transportation to and from school daily via Yellow Bus Services or Metrocard despite the distance from the school. The school personnel are assigned to make sure meals are available to the STH Population. Guidance and SAPIS counselors have been mandated to provide social and emotional services and academic intervention services to STH Population. Student has after school tutoring and credit recovery programs for STH Population. Parent Programs such as ZUMBA, Technology, Food and Clothing Drives, and Toy Drives are scheduled, ongoing PTA Academic and College Access Workshops for our STH Population. The school's attendance intervention team makes regular contact with students and their families to share student progress and data. The school has setaside Title I funding to provide clothing, school supplies, academic intervention services, books, meals, eye wear (if needed). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Unsolicited resumes and Open Market candidates are our primary source of resumes. However, when we need additional candidates we use HR to assist, as well as, reaching out to teacher preparation programs such as Teach for America, the Teaching Fellows, and local graduate schools of education in the NYC metro area (Lehman College, NYU, Teachers College/Columbia). Celia Cruz hires highly qualified candidates based on assessment of our student needs. Celia Cruz conducts a rigorous and extensive interview process that includes a mock lesson in which the candidate is able to demonstrate content knowledge, teaching skills, and technology usage. Our teachers are offered support to help them with their professional growth through ongoing professional development within the school and our network. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our teacher professional development activities are designed to have teachers from different departments come together to share-out their work and ideas around the implementation of the Common Core Learning Standards and performance tasks. This occurs during weekly department team meetings. During this time, our teachers receive data presentations from the data specialist, information about the different domains in Danielson from our Principal and best practices presentations from selected teachers. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program 1  Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Professional development teacher team work includes the creation of common assessments, including midterms and finals that are developed by teachers so that an item analysis, also part of the PD, yields data that allows for gaps in student understanding to be identified so appropriate re-teaching and review strategies may be implemented to improve instruction and student performance. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Federal Federal 376,710 0 N/A 2 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 15  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 0 3,581,130 N/A N/A 15 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in 3  effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title 1, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music will support parents and families of Title I students by:  providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology.  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children. fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress.  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments.  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand.  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community. 5  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office. conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help;    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement 6  The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee supporting or hosting Family Day events   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by with a school-parent participate. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards  using academic learning time efficiently    offering high quality instruction in all content areas  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships   conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved 7    arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents    creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend) sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  Making sure that homework is completed.  Monitoring attendance and tardiness. Document any excused absences.  Monitoring music practice  Volunteering in my child’s school.  Participating, as appropriate, in decisions relating to my children’s education.  Encouraging and supporting positive use of my child’s extracurricular activities. 8  Staying informed about my child’s education and communicating with the school by promptly reading all notices from the school or the school district either received by my child or by mail and responding, as appropriate.  Assist in keeping your child organized by helping them complete their daily responsibilities by managing their time and materials in an appropriate manner.  Review Jupiter Ed.com weekly.  Help students develop healthy habits regarding television, Internet and cell phone usage. Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities  Being able to advocate for myself and ask for help when I need to.  Give to my parents or the adult who is responsible for my welfare all notices and information received by me from my school every day. Follow the Thirteen Non-Negotiable Rules and Regulations   Attend school daily and come on time. If you are absent or late make sure it’s documented.   Move quickly from class to class. Enter the room quietly, take your assigned seat, and begin work Follow school dress code immediately.  Be prepared to work every day by bringing the necessary materials to class.  Do homework nightly and practice music nightly.  Eat only in the cafeteria or when permitted in a classroom if the student cleans up when finished eating.  Do not bring any items that are banned items to school (including iPods, cell phones or cameras)  Keep your desk area clean – above and below.  Do not engage in physical or verbal violence. Learn to agree to disagree. Do not fight.  Respect the building. Do not graffiti or deface any part of the building.    Make sure you are responsible for your instrument at all times. When not in class it should be in your locker Show your student program and ID card to any adult in authority in the building who requests it. Students follow all rules regarding attending classes/performing @ Lehman College. and bring it home nightly. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: The Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music has an ESL program that currently serves 32 students. This program is comprised of both stand alone classes and push-in support during the day. There will be ESL tutoring after school and on Saturdays. The intent of both programs is to support all English language learners to make advancement in language acquisition as well as developing the needed academic language to thrive in the classroom environment. The program is to give students the necessary support in reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills to prepare the students to ensure success on the NYSESLAT and Regents exams, and promote college and career readiness. Entering level students receive three periods per day of support. Intermediate level students receive two periods, and advanced level students receive services in the form of push-in support in their ELA classes. Student placement in the ESL program is based on the results of NYSESLAT and NYSITELL exams. Data from ATS are regularly reviewed in order to identify students requiring ESL services. In addition, all core subject area teachers meet weekly in departments and with school leaders to analyze data and student work on a variety of assessments including Regents exams, common mid-term and final exams, and teacher developed assessments. Based on this data, teacher teams and school leaders identify instructional adjustments and recommend students for additional support as needed. The ESL program is designed to facilitate language acquisition for our English language learners at an accelerated pace. The curriculum uses a variety of texts and teacher-created materials. The Title III allocation will be used to support the implementation of PM School and Saturday Academy. Students will be assigned to these programs baesd on ELL status, targeting entering / emerging English language learners as well as students identified through the inquiry process as needing additional support. The school will stay in close contact with families so that they fully understand the need for PM School and Saturday Academy. PM School: ESL students will have after school classes available twice a week for English language instruction and academic content support. Students will be identified by need. Classes will take place from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. October 1st, 2018 and will end May 31st, 2019. One ENL teacher will be needed for PM School. Saturday Academy: ENL students will have Saturday Academy for English language instruction and academic content support. Students will be identified by need. Saturday Academy will take place Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. October 6th, 2018 through June 1st, 2019. One ENL teacher will be needed for Saturday Academy. The primary language of instruction will be English. The students will have the aid of teachers that speak another language (Spanish). There are glossaries available in their native language to aid them during their classes during the regular school day and for PM School and Saturday Academy. 1  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: The rationale for professional development is to ensure that our students are provided the best possible ELL instruction. All teachers participating in the Title III program will receive professional development in strategies to support English language learners, with a focus on providing scaffolds and adjusting instruction to address language needs and promote reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. These sessions take place on a weekly basis throughout the year. Our ENL teacher will participate in both in-house and outside professional development activities. Our ENL teacher works with both grade teams and department teams to develop strong instruction that is appropriate for our students. They will meet three times a week during their PD period throughout the school year. Content area teachers will also be provided professional learning opportunities to assist in the development of lessons that are appropriate for ENL students during PD periods. ENL and appropriate content staff will be sent to professional development opportunities throughout the school year and specifically on Chancellor's Conference Days. Attendance sheets and agendas are filed with administration. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: The rationale for all of our parent engagement activities is to increase parental involvement in the education processes of our students and strengthen the relationships between families and the staff of Celia Cruz. This will help to reinforce common goals and fortify skills that are needed to prepare ELLs toward college and career readiness. We schedule time with the incoming freshmen parents to with with Ms. Arias (guidance counselor) and Ms Perez (parent coordinator) to explain the academic supports for English language learners. In September and October we will have ELL parent meetings. The meetings cover the academic expectations for the students and the major events for each grade that academic year. We also hold parent events for parents to become involved with the school. Monthly parent association meetings are held on Saturday mornings. Also, in these meetings are workshops, facilitated by Ms. Perez (parent coordinator), in collaboration with the principal and assistant principals. Parental activities related to Title III include providing materials and training to help parents improve their children's academic performance and information on how to use technology. The school uses an online grading system, JupiterGrades, that keeps the students and parents up to date with the students' progress and academic performance. We also 2 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities contact families using an auto-dial phone calling system. Parents are informed about upcoming events and workshops by the parent coordinator, and are regularly contacted by guidance counselors and teachers to discuss student achievement and progress. When necessary, the school's guidance counselor, parent coordinator,and school aides will assist in scheduling and facilitating meetings. When needed, we also use DOE translation services. All parent workshops are conducted in mostly English and Spanish. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) NA  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Celia Cruz Bronx High School of Music Borough Bronx School Number 442 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Jerrod Mabry Coach None ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Moira Murphy Teacher/Subject Area Eliseo Blanco / Math Teacher/Subject Area Xiomara DeLosSantos / Spanish Related-Service Provider Eric Dinowitz Superintendent Fred Walsh Assistant Principal Vern Ram Coach None School Counselor Bianela Colon Parent Crissy Morales Parent Coordinator Yvette Perez Field Support Center Staff Member Alain Berrouet Other (Name and Title) David Fink (A.P.) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 432 Total number of ELLs 26 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 6.02% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): N/A If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? In previous years, our school uses the Scantron Corporation online Performance Series reading test to assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs. The test provides an individualized measure of student instructional reading ability. It is a computer-adaptive diagnostic test that is able to pinpoint the proficiency level of students. According to the data collected by the Performance Series diagnostic, 22% of the ELLs are at a 4th grade reading level, 50% fall between a 6th-7th grade reading level, and 28% are at or above a 9th grade level. Since about 70% of the ELL population are below high school reading level, there is a focus on improving academic accessibility to these students and training in navigating different texts in content areas. In order to support the expanding students to score commanding on the exam, there is a focus on improving literacy. 5  In addition to content-area textbooks that are on ELLs’ instructional level, the ENL class focuses on building literacy skills. Teaching students strategies for approaching a text through questioning, analysis of details, story mapping, and using context clues, are essential. There is also a focus on teaching academic vocabulary that students will encounter across content areas. All teachers perform formative assessments in the classroom multiple times throughout a lesson and using the data to make adjustments to their instruction daily. Some of these strategies include using a computer program named "Plickers" that makes real-time results available to a teacher giving a multiple choice or a true false question as a check-in during class. The school also uses entrance and exit tickets to assess students' understanding of material at the beginning and end of class. Teachers question students throughout a lesson as a "check in" to assure comprehension. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Planning for formative assessment multiple times in a class. Integrating formative assessments multiple times in a unit. Using the results from these assessments to guide instructional planning and make adjustments accordingly. Weekly professional development meetings among teachers to analyze formative assessment practices, results, and next-steps. Teachers meet among and across content areas to more thoroughly assess data. Teachers learning more formative assessment strategies from one another in weekly professional development. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The overall success of our program is measured by the quality of instruction delivered by the ENL teacher and other content area teachers, as observed by the school administration. It is also measured by the increase in our parent participation and parent involvement in the school through the SLT and PTA. Baseline: Upon entering our school, ELLs' academic strengths and progress is measured by assessing student transcripts and credit accumulation as well as conferencing with ELLs done by the ENL teacher and guidance counselors. If the student has spent more than 2 years outside of the New York school system, they will be administered the NYSITELL, which measures English proficiency. All teachers in all content areas give a baseline exam in their respective classes, which gives teachers preliminary data as per the proficiency of their students. Progress and areas of need: The ENL teachers measures progress through monitoring progress throughout units of learning that are project based: when students work toward the creation of one large project that is a culmination of the skills they learned throughout the unit. The teacher can adjust the instruction based on the needs of the whole class or a small group of students who are deficient in their practice. Teachers administer common assessments that are then analyzed for growth and deficits once every quarter. Throughout the year, they will increase in difficulty, with all assessments mirroring the final exam in form and task. We see improvement in our ELLs English proficiency through year-to-year growth in English proficiency levels. Teachers have the opportunity to conference with the ENL teacher to gain new strategies of reaching learners of all levels. Through assessment of student work and monitoring student progress, teachers assess what it is that students need in order to progress in their learning. Final assessment is measured by using the results of both the NYSESLAT exam, as well as the students' success in ELA classes and on the ELA Common Core Regents Exam. Overall academic success is measured by their grades across content areas including their final exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 6  Weekly professional development focuses on cycles of unit and lesson tuning among departments once the summative data has been collected. Quarterly assessments administered by teachers in all content areas. Observations by colleagues to make low-inference notes about instruction. Writing assessments into unit plans. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The school uses NYSESLAT scores to measure students' English Language growth from September. Regents in core content classes are used to assess student progress and final aptitude. Historically, 10-15% of the ELLs at the school are at the Transitioning /Intermediate level .The ENL program has had success in improving the proficiency level of its ELLs. The number of students that are starting at the school at a Entering level is increasing annually. 70-75% of all ELLs are at the Expanding level. Usually most of the 9th grade students who have entered at the Transitioning level will move up to Expanding by 10th grade. This year there are 11 freshmen ELLs, 11 sophomores, and 1 junior. In the last five years, the school has always had more ELLs in 9th grade than in any other grade level. This reflects the increasing numbers of ELLs entering the school every year, as well as an increased proficiency of ELLs as they move from one grade level to the next after freshman year. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL teacher conferences with guidance counselors and content area teachers in September to: Program ELLs of similar proficiency levels together in one ELA class and freestanding ENL class. Assess exam history for all ELL students to determine academic success and weaknesses. Assess modality strengths and weaknesses in reading, writing, speaking and listening. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. All of our ENL students and those in their first year of scoring a commanding on the exam participate in Freestanding ENL. There are currently two freestanding ENL classes. Both are heterogeneous classes. The first is made up of three students who scored commanding on last year's NYSESLAT (2 in grade 12, 1 in grade 11), and the other 5 students are in grades 10 (3 students) and 11 (2 students). In the selection process for this section, the highest-performing transitioning and expanding students were chosen to work alongside those who scored commanding. Students have the opportunity to work independently and bring in school work and homework for which they need additional explanation. There is also a focus on regents preparation (ELA, Math and Science), as two 10th grade students are preparing to take the ELA regents early, by recommendation of their ELA teacher. Grouping for this class is usually based on grade and frequently based on proficiency level. The second group is a heterogeneous class with 19 students, 10 freshmen and 9 sophomores. In this section, there is a curriculum that covers skill-based units as well as 7  coursework investigating fiction and non-fiction text structures, purpose and value. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? ENL as a stand-alone course is offered one period a day, five days a week to all ENL students, regardless of student proficiency level. Integrated ENL is offered in ELA classes, with the ENL teacher pushing in one period a day, five days a week, regardless of student proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The content area classes ELLs take are inclusive general education classes delivered by teachers certified in the content areas. Instruction is given in English. The self-contained ENL program supports student work in the content area classes of English and Social Studies. The ENL teacher provides ELLs with support in their other content area classes during push-in periods and tutoring sessions held during student and teacher free periods. Tutoring is also available after school. Content area teachers use heterogenous grouping of students during group work to support ELLs. The ENL teacher works with content area teachers to develop word walls in content area classrooms to support vocabulary acquisition. Teachers in social studies classes teach students how to annotate readings by modeling the technique and having students practice using annotation while they read content area texts. Teachers across content areas have begun to teach students vocabulary specific to formal argument and to ask students to identify details in the text that support claims students are making within the context of the content area. This instructional focus is aligned with the school’s adoption of the Common Core Learning Standards. These techniques have enriched ELL language development. The ENL teacher provides integrated ENL services in all ELL student ELA classes, regardless of profiency level. The teacher provides support to the ELL students by providing additional CCLS aligned materials. Currently the ENL classroom has a library catering to both the general body and ENL students. Books that support ELLs in content areas are available in the ENL classroom library as well. All content area classes offer textbooks in students’ native languages, when available, to support the students' native language. In addition, glossaries designed specifically for ELLs are made available by the ENL teacher for individual student use to further support the students' native language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The ENL teacher works with one of the Spanish teachers to administer a Spanish-language diagnostic at the beginning of the school year to measure Spanish-speaking ELLs proficiency levels in their native language. Currently there are no ELLs with native languages besides Spanish at the school. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 8  There are currently 2 students labeled as SIFE. An ELL identified as SIFE would be given 2 periods of self-contained ENL per day, as well as received 1-2 periods of push-in ENL daily. SIFEs would be paired with advanced-level ELLs in various content area classes as a way of providing peer-to-peer support in addition to support provided by the teacher. The ENL teacher currently has a collection of graphic novels of texts currently part of the school's ELA curriculum to support instruction in ELA. ELL Newcomers are informally interviewed by the ENL teacher to determine how comfortable the student is with attending school in the US. The NYSESLAT scores are also reviewed to determine English proficiency if the student has been in the US 1 year or longer. If there are no NYSESLAT scores, the NYSITELL will be administered to determine their English language proficiency. If the student appears to be having difficulty adjusting to schooling within the US, the ENL teacher will refer the student to the bilingual guidance counselor, if the student's native language is Spanish. If the newcomer is in his/her junior year of high school and is scheduled to take the ELA Regents exam, the ENL teacher will provide additional practice with the exam during self-contained ENL classes. ELLs who have received 4-6 years of ENL services and have shown continual and steady improvement in English Language proficiency will be monitored to measure whether or not their proficiency continues to improve. Those whose proficiency levels have plateaued will be given targeted instruction in the modality in which their NYSESLAT scores are the lowest. ELLs who have completed 6 years of ENL services will be given targeted instruction in the modality in which their NYSESLAT scores are the lowest. They will also be given a reading diagnostic, such as the Bader or the STAR assessment, to give the ENL teacher additional information about their reading level. These students will be given additional vocabulary and reading comprehension instruction as necessary. Former ELLs are given the opportunity to continue in an ENL class in addition to the ELA class that corresponds to their grade level. Former ELLs are also given extended time on formal assessments, including state and district mandated testing, as well as the use of glossaries and dictionaries in native languages. The ENL teacher tracks the progress made by ELLs who have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT, providing academic support when needed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The guidance counselors and SPED team identify who the ELL-SWDs at the school are at the beginning of each school year. They then work with the ENL teacher and related services teacher to program ELL-SWDs into both ENL and ICT classes, ensuring that these students receive all mandated services. ELL-SWDs are often given push-in ENL services in a content area class in addition to their ENL and ICT classes. The ENL teacher and related services teacher meet frequently to discuss the needs and progress of ELL-SWDs. Visuals are used to illustrate vocabulary lessons. Graphic organizers are used to plan writing assignments before students are asked to complete writing tasks. Pre-reading strategies, such as text-previewing and accessing prior knowledge by discussing the themes of texts, are used before read alouds and independent reading. Teachers provide ELL-SWDs with outlines of notes that can be annotated during direct-instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Curricular flexibility is achieved through co-planning between the ENL teacher, the related services and content area teachers. Teachers are instructionally flexible in designing lessons for ELL-SWDS through differentiating the assessments they assign students. Students identified as ELL-SWD are scheduled into both self-contained ENL classes and ICT resource room classes. This ensures that students are provided with both mandated services. The ENL and related services teachers review IEPs of ELL-SWDs together to discuss what strategies work best to address student academic needs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9  Currently, the ENL teacher pushes into freshmen Social Studies classes. Advanced ELLs are programmed for both ENL and ELA classes. Teachers from all departments are available during student lunch two days a week for tutoring. A teacher from the math, social studies, ELA, and science departments provide tutoring for students after school. Materials in students’ native language are available, as necessary. The school computer lab is available throughout the school day and after school for students who need extended time to complete projects or for completing online enrichment activities. Through professional development beginning at the start of the academic year, teachers have been made aware of which students in their classes are ELLs; they were given the list by grade level and language proficiency. They have also been given data about the ELLs in their classes. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, we will be adding Integrated ENL services for our ENL students in their core content classes. This will be done by the ENL teacher working collaboratively with the teachers to tune unit and lessons to reach all learners and make material accessible to them.. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Currently we do not see a need to discontinue any of our services for the upcoming school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Student programs are open to all students. Students enroll in school programs via their guidance counselor or by attending meetings the first day the program meets. The ENL teacher offers after-school tutoring for ELLs every Wednesday and Thursday for two hours. More in-depth help with homework, projects, and study skills are offered at that time. There are several music groups that meet after school. Participation in these groups are determined by student performance in their music classes. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school has concentrated on incorporating current technologies into classrooms for student use. SMART Boards are available in every classroom. Teachers have received ongoing training on its use during in-house professional development. This has enabled students to interact with lesson plans teachers have created incorporating the internet, i.e., planet earth, Smithsonian etc. There are several computer carts available for classroom use, as well as a computer lab. These are used for research projects, word processing, testing, among other activities. The self-contained ENL classes have used the computers to access interactive audio files for the ENL literature textbook. The school uses Jupitergrades.com, an online gradebook that gives teachers, students, and parents access to student academic progress, homework assignments, and daily student attendance. It also allows for email correspondence between parents and teachers. This has helped ELLs be more accountable for keeping track of their progress in their classes. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support for our Spanish-speaking population is offered during free-periods by the Foreign Language department. Spanish-English glossaries are provided to ELLs for use during their content area classes. ELLs are encouraged to use one another to translate concepts difficult to grasp in English. Spanish-language independent reading books are made available to students in the Spanish classroom library, with many popular young adult fiction titles translated from English into Spanish. Spanish language magazines are also available. The school has two Spanish-English bilingual guidance counselors to provide services to students and families whose first language is not English. The LAP team has begun discussion to prepare for a time when the school has ELLs whose native language is not Spanish. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All support services and resources we make available to our ELLs are designed for high school students between the ages of 14-19 and in grades 9-12. We make sure to provide services that are developmentally appropriate for our students. In 0  addition, there are reading resources of adapted texts that correspond to books that they read in ELA. Paraprofessionals are provided for students who require such services as stated in their IEP. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The school has concentrated on incorporating current technologies into classrooms for student use. SMART Boards are available in every classroom. Teachers have received ongoing training on its use during in-house professional development. This has enabled students to interact with lesson plans teachers have created incorporating the internet, i.e., planet earth, Smithsonian etc. There are several computer carts available for classroom use, as well as a computer lab. These are used for research projects, word processing, testing, among other activities. The self-contained ENL classes have used the computers to access interactive audio files for the ENL literature textbook. The school uses Jupitergrades.com, an online gradebook that gives teachers, students, and parents access to student academic progress, homework assignments, and daily student attendance. It also allows for email correspondence between parents and teachers. This has helped ELLs be more accountable for keeping track of their progress in their classes. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school conducts an open house for eighth grade students interested in attending our school. The ENL teacher and parent coordinator are present at the open house to answer questions ELLs and their families may have about what type of programming is available. At the beginning of the summer before they start 9th grade, incoming students are required to attend a school orientation that takes students and their families through a mock student schedule, acquainting students and families with what it will be like to attend the school. The ENL teacher and parent coordinator are also present at this event. Over the summer, the school offers a summer bridge program to give incoming freshmen a head start with the freshmen ELA and math curriculum. ELLs are especially targeted in recruiting for this program. The summer band, orchestra and choir programs familiarize students with the music program at our school before the fall semester begins. The LAP team has begun discussing ideas to recruit more ELLs to the summer bridge program. New ELLs who enroll throughout the year are paired with ELLs who are familiar with the school. These students help new ELLs navigate the school. New ELLs also meet regularly with their guidance counselor who keeps track of their integration into the school. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? The language classes available at our school are Spanish language classes, from beginning-level classes to Advanced Placement Spanish Language. The upperclassmen ELLs at our school are all encouraged to take the AP course. There are currently 2 former ELLs taking the AP Spanish Language course. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 1  All ELL personnel at our school receive professional development in strategies to support English language learners, with a focus on providing scaffolds and adjusting instruction to address language needs and promote reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills. These sessions take place on a weekly basis throughout the year and include the following topics: - Scaffolding Reading of Complex Texts for English Language Learners - Building Academic Vocabulary - Engaging and Supporting English Language Learners in Classroom Discussion - Using Student Self-Assessment and Rubrics - Planning Lessons that Integrate Universal Design for Learning Principles - Supporting English Language Learners in Meeting Common Core Standards in Literacy - Designing Lessons Implementing Achieve3000 - Using Castle Learning to Support Regents Readiness - Using Student Data to Inform Instructional Adjustments that Address the Needs of English Language Learners Professional development is facilitated by the administrative team, instructional lead teachers, and a consultant from Teachers College, and other ENL specialists from the DOE. Professional learning sessions take place during daily common planning time. Teachers work with facilitators in small groups, determined by department, as well as areas of need identified through analysis of observation data. We offer curriculum development PD sessions focusing on implementing the CCLS into all classes, including ENL standalone classes as well as Integrated ENL classes. The activities will include planning using the Universal Design for Learning to provide students with multiple entry points and differentiated activities and assessments, in order to better meet the ENL student needs. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Celia Cruz High School supports ENL staff to assist students as they transition from middle to high school by providing them time to test each individual student, and use this assessment data to guide their instruction for each student. ENL teachers will receive ELL-specific professional development through city-wide and CUNY-led PD sessions, as well as through coaching. All staff will receive 4 professional development sessions on ELL-specifics. For all staff, the assistant principal will keep agenda and attendance records, and for ENL teachers, the teacher herself will keep all information in regards to the professional development session. The ENL teacher is also part of the Affinity group's English Language Learners' Professional Learning Community. This is a group targeted specifically for ELL professionals who wish to grow in their practice. There are 5 full day sessions throughout the year, when specialists in the field provide resources and coaching for the ENL teachers in the group. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences, the ENL teacher sets up individual parent meetings as "check-ins" throughout the year. At these meetings, the NYSESLAT is discussed, as well as the students progress in both his or her ENL class as well as their core subject area classes. The schools parent coordinator, as well as both guidance counselor's, act as a translator during any school meeting with parents. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. 2  We continue to see strong parental involvement in our School Leadership Team (SLT) meetings and Parent-Teacher Association. The school Messenger System is helpful in making mass phone calls home about upcoming school events and student absences. As a result of the online grading system Jupitergrades.com, communication about student academic progress between the school and parents has improved. Many parents are logging on and we have an increase in parent phone calls to the school following up on their student’s progress. The two Spanish-English bilingual guidance counselors have also improved contact with parents of ELLs. We are now able to increase the amount of communication between the school and this parent population. Parents are invited to chaperone school field trips and attend student concerts at the end of each semester. There is an annual International Day potluck that brings many students' families to the school. The parent coordinaor acts as the point-person for all communication between parents and the school. She is bi-lingual, and speaks both spanish and english. Therefore, the parent coordinator acts as a translator during any communication between the parents and the school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 3 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Jerrod Mabry, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 4  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Celia Cruz Bronx High School o School DBN: 10X442 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Jerrod Mabry Title Principal Vern Ram Assistant Principal Yvette Perez Parent Coordinator Moira Murphy ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Xiomara DeLosSantos (Spanish) Teacher/Subject Area Eliseo Blanco (Math) Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Bianela Colon School Counselor Fred Walsh Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Jocelyn Santana Eric Dinowitz Other Related Service Prov David Fink Sarah Arias Other Assistant Principal Other Guidance Counselor Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 6/23/17 5  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: x442 School Name: Celia Cruz Bronx HS of Music Superintendent: Fred Walsh The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Sarah Moira Yvette Arias Murphy Perez Guidance Counselor ENL Teacher Parent Coordinator Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Two scenarios unfold when a student enters our school: 1. If they are coming from another NYS school: CCBXHSM uses parent-reported and student-reported data to assess the language needs of our community. This data is accessed online through ATS. ATS data is updated by collecting biographical information on the school blue cards and entered in ATS. Information is also accessed when the student biographical reports are printed out through ATS. 6  2. If student did NOT come from a NYS school. We use the information from the home language survey given to parents when determining the language that is spoken at home. For all students: The RAPL list is generated every year from ATS to assure we are accurate in knowing the families preferred language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Nahuatl Spanish 1 1 1 231 0.11 0.11 0.11 24.81 1 1 1 235 0.11 0.11 0.11 25.24 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Welcome letters, including school rules, expectations, discipline, online grade book instructions, NYCDOE media release form, and a yearly calendar. September Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. All official DOE documents are available in the most commonly used languages. Customized documents in Spanish are reviewed by our Language Access Coordinators and other bilingual staff. 7  Academic progress letters, monthly notifications about meetings and/or workshops, school calendar/activities notifications, attendance notifications. Monthly School and state testing information Prior to Regents/AP testing (Generally once in September, December, May and June) Report Cards Quarterly For languages other than English and Spanish: We use T&I Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. All official DOE documents are available in the most commonly used languages. Customized documents in Spanish are reviewed by our Language Access Coordinators and other bilingual staff. We use T&I Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. All official DOE documents are available in the most commonly used languages. Customized documents in Spanish are reviewed by our Language Access Coordinators and other bilingual staff. All official DOE documents are available in the most commonly used languages. Customized documents in Spanish are reviewed by our Language Access Coordinators and other bilingual staff. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to NYCDOE Parent-Teacher Conferences, a pot-luck dinner to start the school year. September, November/December, May provide interpretation service(s)? Should a parent need Spanish/other translation services, a guidance counselor will provide translation. 8  PTA meetings and workshops Monthly Individual parent meetings in regards to academic progress and/or attendance October, February, April College awareness meetings Monthly Over the phone interpretation is available as well, in addition to Vendors and Volunteers for other languages and face-to face meetings. Ms. Perez runs the PTA meetings, and she provides all materials in English and Spanish, as requested by the parents. Should a teacher need to speak with a parent on an individual basis and are not able to speak Spanish, they are able to call the DOE hotline for translation services to speak with a parent regarding their child's progress. Ms. Colon (guidance) runs these meetings, and is able to translate in Spanish the information provided in each meeting. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The bilingual staff in the school (<50%) would call homes to the LEP families to inform them of an emergency. For languages not supported by staff, they are able to use the language translation line to inform parents in their preferred language. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. As per the school's plan for professional development, there will be a turnkey training held in September for all staff that covers this regulation, as to ensure its enforcement. Staff will be trained on how to use the over-the-phone translation services (Language line), as well as using the school system (Jupiter Grades) to monitor teacher communication with parents and tools used to promote clear communication. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services 9  Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All Language Access materials are made available in the Parent Coordinator's office All notifications are available in translated form through the DOE intranet Letters will be sent home, emails with translations (done by translation vendors) will be distributed to parents and families informing them of their right to receive and inquire information. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We look at the NYCDOE parent survey results to gather feedback in regards to the quality and availability of translation services. Our school will also be scheduling a focus group of parents that represent all cultures and languages in our school, in order to gather feedback on the language services that we provide. 0 
