2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X443 School Name: THE FAMILY SCHOOL Principal: ROWENA PENN 2018-19 SCEP-FF 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 2  School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 09X443 The Family School 320900010443 PK-5 1116 Sheridan Avenue Bronx NY 10456 718-538-3266 Phone Number: 718-538-3364 Fax: Rowena Penn Rpenn@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Rowena Penn DalilahQuinones Giselle Miranda Ida Ezaguirre Juderlina Corniel Not applicable NA District Information District 9 Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Geographical District: Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue Bronx NY 10456 Superintendent’s Office Address: Rrosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7143 Phone Number: 718-410-7017 Fax: Bronx District 9 FSC: Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-FF 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-3113 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Rowena Penn DalilahQuinones Sandra Flores NA Juderlina Corniel NA NA NA Ida Ezaguirre Tamalia Walcott Maida Rivera *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Chairwoman/Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher 2018-19 SCEP-FF 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) TareapheRichards Elsa Aybar DiegaRamirez Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ 2018-19 SCEP-FF 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and informed by New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 7  comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 8  Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 9   Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Implement at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of) beginning no later than the 2018-19 school year.  Step 7: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 8: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Family Schools mission is to prepare our students for college and careers in the 21 st century. In order to provide our students with the best opportunity to succeed. Our vision and mission statement fits into the capacity framework laid out by Chancellor Richard Carranza which emphasizes trust as the overarching bond that ties together all elements of student achievement. The mission statement of The Family School emphasizes building trust between all school constituencies; as families thrive with trust and commitment, so will The Family School as we build bonds between all of our constituents. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Family School, 09x443, is a PreK-5 School located in the Morrisania section of the Bronx. The Family School is a diverse learning community serving students of differing racial and ethnic backgrounds.The school has many school constituencies including Council of School Supervisors & Administrators, United Federation of Teachers, DC37, parents, and counselors from Bronx Works Community Based Organization that have been made available through a federal grant and are housed in school building 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. The Family School is a Title I school responsible for 520 students. The school gender make up is 54% female and 46% male. The ethnic make-up of the student body is 65% Hispanic, 28% African American, 24% Asian and 1% white. The student body is made up of 38% English Language Learners and 23% Special Education students, and 90% of the student population is economically disadvantaged. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. At PS443 we have worked to develop all elements of the Framework for Great Schools. In particular 3. Collaborative Teachers, whereby the entire school is scheduled for grade teams to meet weekly for instructional planning and additional time is set aside to conduct our Inquiry, involving teams in 'progress monitoring against expected outcomes'. 4. Effective School Leadership is another area of progress as has been demonstrated through feedback from the Quality Review Report and a particular area of celebration as being well developed was in High Expectation. We have been focused on 1. Rigorous Instruction and PS443 gained improvements in the Proficiency Levels of the State Tests as outlined below. This element will continue as a major focus for 2018-2019 to extend the gains already made. Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYSELA 2018 31% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 19%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYSELA is 12%  13% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 8%  26% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 8%  33% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 14%  8% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 5%  31% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2017 an improvement of 15%  31% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYSELA Test in 2018 an improvement of 9% 2018-19 SCEP-FF 11  Percentage of students achieving proficiency in NYS Math 2018 37% (Level 3 and 4). In 2017 the percentage of students achieving proficiency 25%. Percentage improvement for ALL students from 2017 to 2018 in NYS Math is 12% Percentage improvement for our subgroups in NYS Math 2018:  37% Grade 3-5 SWD students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 12%  24% Black or African American students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 11%  43% Hispanic or Latino students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 13%  19% English Language Learner students achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018. Percentage improvement from 2017 to 2018 is 4%  38% Grade 3-5 Males achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2017 an improvement of 9%  37% Grade 3-5 Females achieved proficiency NYS Math Test in 2018 an improvement of 16% School Quality Guide 2017-18: Effective: 1.2, 2.2, 5.1 Highly Effective: 1.1, 1.3, 3.1, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2 Measures of Leadership Practice (MOLP Rating and Score 2017-18 Score 92/100, therefore Highly Effective 2017-18 NYC School Survey Response Rates: Teachers 95% (41) Parents 63% (257) After examination of each of the elements we are confident that our progress will continue into the 2018-19 school year. 5. Identify at least one USDE Turnaround Principle (e.g., redesign the school day, week, or year; modify the instructional program to ensure it is Evidence-based, rigorous, and aligned with State academic content standards; provide time for collaboration on the use of data) to be implemented in the 2018-19 school year. The family school has focused on creating rigorous instructional programs. We have utilized various resources to help our teachers create units of study, including a specific focus to ensure Common Core alignment as well as academic vocabulary. Our instructional coaches and educational consultants plan with our teachers and grade teams. We have shown growth in student outcomes and expect to show continued improvement as we refine and develop our units of study. We will continue to push for a rigorous curricula. The school leader ensures and supports the quality 2018-19 SCEP-FF 12  implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards that is monitored to meet the needs of ALL our students. We devote time to an increase in rigorous activities for our students, with a special focus on supporting our subgroups of students English Language Learners, lowest 1/3rd, students with disabilities, students who need enrichment as well as our gifted and talented students. This work is strategically done during after school, Saturday academy and early morning remediation and enrichment programs. All of which are designed to focus on the schools distinct and diverse sub groups. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X443 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 554 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 19 18 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 43 34 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 94.6% % Reduced Lunch 30.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 67.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.16 0% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 30.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 63% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups Black Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 67 68 91.3% 1.6% 23.8% 27.1% 4.2% 0.5% 4 5% 6.7 37.7% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FF 14  2018-19 SCEP-FF 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X X Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have been successful in planning units and lessons aligned to grade level Common Core Learning Standards in all content areas. K-5 units of study were revised by teacher teams with the support of our instructional leaders. This year we achieved an additional 12% in the proficiency levels in the Grade 3-5 NYS Mathematics Test, and an additional 12% proficiency levels in the Grade 3-4 NYS ELA . To build upon this work our K-5 grade teams will continue to revise units of study, create lab sites, work with consultants, and attend professional development sessions. This year all of the grade 4 teachers attended the algebra for All training offered over the summer by the city. Many teachers including myself attend the TC week long reading and writing clinics. In addition the entire staff is now trained in the Orton Gillingham methodology for literacy instruction. In addition, this year we achieved an additional 12% in the proficiency levels in the grade 3-5 NYS Mathematics Test. In mathematics we have facilitated training for teachers on the 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematical Discussions, involving using math curricula differently. We are currently focused on supporting our teacher teams in strategically selecting multi-dimensional problems that lead students to a deeper conceptual understanding and to adjust their lesson accordingly. During the summer teacher have worked to unpack the curriculum in preparation for the upcoming year. Through this work it is our goal to devise rigorous and coherent lessons adapting teaching strategies to meet the needs of the all of our students. This year is the schools second year participating in the Algebra for All 2018-19 SCEP-FF 16  initiative, now not only are the schools 5 grade teachers trained, the schools 3rd and 4th grade teachers have all attend this training. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Goal 1: By June 2019 all teachers will plan rigorous and differentiated instruction based on formative and summative assessment data, resulting in a growth in student proficiency on the 2019 NYS test in Mathematics by a 5% reduction in level 1 students in Math and a 5% reduction in level 1 students in ELA. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teams will review the NYSELA 2017-18 and nominate the lowest performing standards by: Teachers Sept18-June 19 Instructional Coaches, Coaches, Supervisors - examining individual students at 3-5 grade level - examining overall Gr.3-5 school-wide data - September 2018 Baseline data for I-Ready Reading Based on the triangulation there will be a particular emphasis on 3 specific standards for each grade. It is intended to enable students to develop knowledge and skills to support their construction of meaning as they engage in a thorough exploration through discussion. Teachers will plan lessons that support and extend students’ thinking about what they encounter in grade level reading and how they may express their ideas and understandings in their writing Grade 2-5 will deconstruct New York State ELA and Mathematics Test questions: Teachers Sept18– June 19 Instructional Coaches, Grade Teams, Supervisors - They will align these to specific ELA and Math Standards - Teams will plan to use the specific language and questioning style from the NYS Tests throughout their lessons - Findings will be integrated into unit and lesson plans. - K-5 classes will focus their small group guided sessions around higher order questioning to promote students to articulate their thinking through discussion 2018-19 SCEP-FF 18  All Teams will review DIBELS, F & P Running Records, Writing and Math I-Ready, Unit assessment(s) and Interim assessments) to monitor progress against of this goal Teachers, Sept18– June 19 Instructional coaches, Supervisors, Grade Teams Teachers will plan to address the gap analysis for individual students who are struggling, ESL and Special Ed Teachers will be supported by research based AIS techniques to improve student outcomes towards achievement of the grade level CCLS aligned instructional goals. Teachers, Students, Sept18– June 19 Administration The programs we will use also include Orton Gillingham K-2, Fundations and The F&P intervention kits. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement OG K-2 Consultants, ULit K-2 Consultants, ELA and Mathematics Coaches, SETTS/RTI/ESL/Bilingual Teachers, Data Specialist, Supervisors How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration and Parent Coordinator will ensure that parents and families are supported in understanding the level of rigor required and provided with strategies to support their children to further progress at home, at: · Parent/Teacher Conferences (4 times in the year) · Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays · Open House events, such as Meet the Teach, classroom celebrations such as publishing parties · Scheduled Curricula workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Fountas & Pinnell kits were purchased and teachers were trained in the administration of Running Records RTI/SETTS/AT Risk students. 1 fulltime Coach in math and 1 Full-time Universal Literacy Coach will be utilized to support instruction and curriculum/ standards alignment Per session funding will be provided to support teacher planning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA X P/F Set-aside 21st Century X C4E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 19  Title I 1003(a) X Title III PTA Funded SIG Grant School Achievement Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, the school will see an average rise in I-Ready screener reading levels of 4% for all students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The instruments of measure that will be used are, Mastery connect, IReady, Running Record Tracker, Math unit trackers. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. MID YEAR READING DATA BY GRADE 1stGr. 97 students – Level 1 Below 60%, Working Towards 12%, At 15%, Above 13% 2ndGr. 90 students – Level 1 Below 56%, Working Towards 17%, At 20%, Above 7% 3rdGr. 77 students – Level 1 Below 39%, Working Towards 35%, At 5%, Above 21% 4thGr. 87 students – Level 1 Below 51%, Working Towards 8%, At 11%, Above 30% 5thGr. 75 students – Level 1 Below 38%, Working Towards 15%, At 31%, Above 16% JANUARY ’19 GAINS INTERIM MATH ASSESSMENTS CLASS AVERAGES Kinder: Class 001 +3%, 002 +16%, 003 + 24%, 021 +13%, 831 -1% Grade 1: Class 101 +4%, 103 -5%, 121 +2%, 131 -4%, 831 +31% Grade 2: Class 201 +16%, 221 -7%, 231 +1%, 631 +5% Grade 3: Class 301 +23%, 321 -2%, 331 +5% Grade 4: Class 401 +31%, 421 -3%, 431 +20%, 731 +17% Grade 5: Class 501 +4%, 521 +14%, 531 +1%, 731 +43% Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 20  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our strength in working within this Framework element has been the result of considerable effort to focus on establishing and maintaining a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. In this we will have a greater focus on Social Emotional aspects of student development to support their ability to adapt and develop greater resilience. To undertake this we have established strong partnerships with community based organizations such as Bronx Works, to create two full time anti-violence counselors who reside in our school. We have also partnered with NYCares to enhance our school building and Mind share to bring outside opportunities to our students. Our partnership with Mindshare has given our students the opportunity to visit offices to see what college and career ready really means, established a technology fund that is used to fund our school’s needs. We also have a partnership with Morris Heights Health Center who provides us with a full time social worker. In 2018-19 we have chosen to focus on the Social and Emotional growth of our students and support all school stakeholders to work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 21  We will have teachers attend PBIS trainings and turnkey to the staff as well as bring trainers to our school to work with our staff in house. Our teachers have also banded together to continue the work of the “Duran Project” in memory of our former student who was taken from us too young. We will have teachers mentoring our students during and outside of our school day to increase our involvement in our student’s lives to ensure they continue to grow academically as well as socially and emotionally. All staff use the class dojo classroom communication app to share reports between classroom and parents, track student behavior. The PBIS team meets bi-weekly to analyze the SWIS data reports and develop next steps. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 2: By June 2019 there will be a 4.5% reduction in OORS reports as a result of enhanced student social-emotional well-being (PBIS) systems being implement school wide and monitored by the PBIS Team (Dean, Guidance Counselor, school aide, principal, parents.) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 22  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) This goal involves engaging all stakeholders in developing monitoring and refining a shared vision to optimize student outcomes and collaborative engagement of families All School stakeholders Oct.18- Administration, June'19 RTI team, Social Emotional Team, PBIS team We will implement the PBIS framework as a core practice with systems of the specific interventions, strategies, and/or curricula selected and/or developed by the implementation team. We have a PBIS team that is led by our dean. The team will continue training all school staff, including those new to the school. The presentation describes rationale, features, outcomes of PBIS, and School-wide Positive Behavior Support. It especially focuses on: · prevention · continuum of evidence-based practices, · academic-behavior link, · systems capacity We will focus on rewarding students for perfect attendance and good behavior and use the "Class Dojo" system and all appropriate supports will be in place to impact safety in our school. We will continue to work to improve social-emotional well-being, especially paying close attention to the needs of students who have a range of disabilities, ELL students and identified high needs students. We will be establishing peer mediation program with opportunities for community service, enhanced mental health services and counseling and school-wide classroom-based education on health and anti-bullying, with support from Bronx Works and Morris Heights Health Center. We will support the elements of Pupil Centered, Responsive and Rigorous, Interactive, Diverse, Engagement (P.R.I.D.E.) and elements of teacher feedback, supporting classrooms that are culturally responsive and inclusive. We will ensure a rigorous implementation All Students, At-Risk Students Sept 18 - June 2019 Social Emotional Team Student Intervention Team 2018-19 SCEP-FF 23  of Domain 3, Danielson during our PD review that will be reinforced during actionable feedback to teachers. Continue with the highly successful student government with representatives from 3rd, 4th and 5th grade classrooms. The student government promotes student voice, student decision making, and teaches principles of leadership. We will ensure that weekly SIT meetings will include analysis of school wide incident data to determine what interventions currently being utilized need to be adjusted so that all staff and students feel safe at school. Students Sept18- June 19 Social Emotional Team,PBIS Team SIT team will develop and disseminate a survey to administer to the staff to gauge whether or not we are making adequate progress towards meeting this goal. At Risk Students Oct-Nov'18 Social Emotional Team PBIS Team Recommendations will be delivered to the Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration and Parent Coordinator will ensure that parents and families are supported in understanding the level of rigor required and provided with strategies to support their children to further progress at home, at: · Parent/Teacher Conferences (4 times in the year) · Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays · Open House events, such as Meet the Teach, classroom celebrations such as publishing parties · Scheduled Curricula workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Dean position and fund salary (PF Positive Behavior Management. Programs: At-risk Counseling), supplies (PF Positive Behavior Management. Programs) 2. Social Worker salary (PF Positive Behavior Management. Programs: At-risk Counseling), supplies (PF Positive Behavior Management. Programs) 3. Guidance Counselor salary (PF Positive Behavior Management. Programs: At-risk Counseling), supplies (PF Positive Behavior Management. Programs) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 24  X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019 we will decrease the number of incidents reported in our School Wide Information ( SWIS) System by 10 reported incidents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The specific instrument that will be used is the (SWIS) data base Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. The school is currently on track to meeting its goal of a 4.5% reduction in OORS reports. Currently the number of incidents reported is down by 6%. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed X 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. X 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This year we will focus on Tenet 4 and teacher teams will be provided with multiple opportunities to participate in professional development to ensure they understand, plan and deliver differentiated instruction designed to meet the learning needs of each student. Teacher teams have the opportunity to meet weekly with support staff to plan lessons and revise or develop units of study. In particular in mathematics , our Math Coach and teachers worked collaboratively to refine our Math curriculum and math block during the summer. We began this school year with all grades having two years of experience using the math curriculum, Eureka Math. The Eureka Math program is 100% aligned to the CCLS and is mirrored after EngageNY. We have worked consistently to fill in our students learning gaps and improve the rigor of our materials. In all grades the math block includes the following math components: Math Warm-Up, Math lesson and Review. In Kindergarten through fifth grade teachers include 20 minutes of review of previously learned content or remediation of old skills that students need further instruction and support with. Teachers have created differentiated centers to increase student achievement to spiral back on concepts in a more rigorous way. In Kindergarten through 2nd grade teachers focus on math warm-ups that include a variation of fluency activities, math problem of the day and number talks. In grades 3 through 5 we set about revamping our Math block by increasing the length of the math block to ninety-minutes. In addition, we added the 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions to the math block. The 5 Practices allows high-quality discussions which support student learning of mathematics. The 5 Practices helps student learn how to communicate their ideas and encourage students to evaluate their own and each other’s mathematical ideas. In addition, the math curriculum has performance tasks that are embedded in the modules and module and interim assessments. The module and interim assessments call for students to apply their knowledge and skills and not just 2018-19 SCEP-FF 26  recognition and recall. Each assessment is comprised of both multiple choice and open-ended questions that allow students to use different strategies to explain their thinking. The assessments are evaluated with an established criteria aligned to the goals being assessed. When creating the math assessments in grades 3 through 5, the format and content is similar to the New York State Math Exams. When analyzing the assessment all teachers have been provided with an Interim Assessment Review Checklist to ensure that the assessments include the correct content, format, and college and career expectations. In literacy this year we have taken our past units and shifted them towards the Teacher’s College Units of Study in both reading and writing. Teachers were included in the decision to modify our curriculum and have used TC resources this year to increase the level of rigor in our ELA units of study. We place high value on using current data, student work and teacher input to make the units fit the needs of our students. Classrooms use whole group instruction to deliver Tier 1 instruction, but spend the majority of the reading block in small group instruction using guided reading and literature circles to accommodate student need. The curriculum allows for embedded differentiation by allowing students the flexibility of accessing texts on their level during guided reading and independent reading while using grade level standards to push the level of thinking. In reading and writing, teachers now have access to a curriculum with standards-based lesson that vertically work towards increasing rigor and matching the demands of the CCSS. In addition to standard aligned, rigorous units and lessons, with the use of Teacher’s College, students are spending more time immersed in literature- from mentor texts and during independent reading alike. Students spend time during writing workshop writing, in their writers notebooks, examining exemplars, evaluating both student and modeled writing using evaluative checklists and unit specific rubrics. One teacher from each grade receives training at Teacher’s College based on the Writing Units of Study. Grade representatives, along with literacy coaches, work to develop reading and writing units and gather resources to create units that impact student learning through accessing points of entry based on data. Specific work has been done around refining the writing products using standards based rubrics on a school-wide level. Teachers have spent time during professional development opportunities exploring the rubrics and norming student work (pre-assessments, published pieces and beginning, middle and end-line writing pieces) around research based criteria. Based on the results, the writing units are refined and revised to meet the current needs of students on a class-by-class level. Students are challenged to complete tasks that require higher order thinking through the use of questioning embedded in lesson plans and focused on integrated curricular subject areas. As well, rigor is reinforced through supplemental activities found in the NY Ready resource. The student book is aligned with the CCSS and has depth of knowledge questions attached to the reading passages, which are used during the reading block as guided practice and independent work. Our interim assessments have been geared towards assessing unit specific goals that are based on CCSS standards and mirror the state exam in both format and rigor. Teacher's assist in the creation of the assessment and administer it as they would the state exam. Immediately following the exam scoring, teachers spend time with students in small group 2018-19 SCEP-FF 27  or individual conferences, giving students actionable next steps for their thinking, reading and writing. The goal is to make the state exams seems more approachable and personalize the experience for students to approximate success. Results are analyzed by school leaders and teachers and class goals are created and reinforced through center activities, small group instruction and homework Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 3: By June 2019, 100% of our classroom teachers will collaborate to share best practice, resulting in a growth in student proficiency on the 2019 NYS tests by a 2.0% reduction in level 1 students in Mathematics and a 2.3% reduction in level 1 students in ELA 2018-19 SCEP-FF 28 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teacher Teams Sept.18- June'19 Administration Staff development Committee Coaches Nominated K-5 teachers Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Collaborate with teachers from other schools Specialty Groups, Calendar Days, and Institutes from Teachers College Reading and Writing Project as well as sharing promising practices as Learning Partners in order to increase their collaboration with teachers from other schools and with our school in order to expand and share promising practices. Firstly, a nominee from each grade will attend regular monthly Teacher College Reading Writing Project (TCRWP) Professional Development days on Writing. They will take bring their learning back to their teams. The TCRWP PD and Units of study will: - provide all the teaching points, mini-lessons, conferences, and small group work needed to teach a comprehensive workshop curriculum in opinion/argument, information, and narrative writing - foster high-level thinking through regular chances to synthesize, analyze, and critique - build writing independence and fluency - a ladder of exemplar texts that model writing progressions across grades K–5 - provide strategies for writing across the curriculum - provide strategic performance assessments to help monitor mastery and differentiate instruction Additionally, our representative staff members go off-campus to engage with teachers from All Staff Sept.18- June'19 PS 294 to refine the implementation of the ‘5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions’. On return they will conduct professional with grades 3-5 to provide teachers with more control over student-centered pedagogy. They do so by allowing the teacher to manage the content that will be discussed Administration, Staff Development Committee, Coaches 2018-19 SCEP-FF 29  and how it will be discussed. Through careful planning, the amount of improvisation required by the teacher “in the moment” is kept to a minimum. Teachers will be freed to listen to and make sense of outlier strategies and to thoughtfully plan connections between different ways of solving problems, by: - anticipating likely student responses to challenging mathematical tasks. Anticipating requires that teachers do the problem as many ways as they can - monitoring students’ actual responses to the tasks (while students work on the tasks in pairs or small groups) Monitoring student responses involves paying close attention to students’ mathematical thinking and solution strategies as they work on the task. - selecting particular students to present their mathematical work during the whole-class discussion. The selection of particular students and their solutions is guided by the mathematical goal for the lesson and the teacher’s assessment of how each contribution will contribute to that goal. Thus, the teacher selects certain students to present because of the mathematics in their responses - sequencing the student responses that will be displayed in a specific order. This ordering begins with the least sophisticated representation (a picture) of the least sophisticated strategy (scaling up by collecting sets) and ends with the most sophisticated strategy (scale factor), a sequencing that would help with the goal of accessibility. - connecting different students’ responses and connecting the responses to key mathematical ideas. Rather than having mathematical discussions consist of separate presentations of different ways to solve a particular problem, the goal is to have student presentations build on one another to develop powerful mathematical ideas. Teacher teams will plan assessment that is fully integrated into instruction, through extensive use of formative assessments. All Staff Sept.18- June'19 Administration, Teacher Teams. Coaches Teacher teams will use Protocols for examining student work and review Mastery Connect and I-Ready to assess their achievement against the grade level CCLS and define areas of strength and weakness. Teacher teams will develop strategies to help students know and be able to provide evidence that they have contributed to, the grade level assessments criteria. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 30  Parents will be invited to review student work during Parent Teacher conferences and specific workshops for interested parents to explore a range of assessment criteria used to assess student achievement In their unit plans teams will ensure there are questions and assessments that can be used regularly to diagnose evidence of learning by individual students. Teams will build a repertoire of forms of feedback, from teacher, that is accurate and specific and advances learning. Teachers will be coached, as necessary to successfully differentiate instruction to address individual students' misunderstandings through the roving and 1:1 conferences, throughout instruction. Teams will be supported to foster methods for students to self-assess and monitor their own progress. All classes will conduct baseline assessments and review the baseline data to devise Grade 2-5 After School Lists of targeted students All Staff, ENL and SETTS providers Sept18-June 19 Supervisors, ENL and SETTS Providers, Coaches All teachers will strategize intervention for struggling students, ELLs, SWDs and/or add enrichment approaches, as deemed appropriate. Grade Teams will meet with ENL and SETTS providers to share information on the progress of the subgroups. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration and Parent Coordinator will ensure that parents and families are supported in understanding the level of rigor required and provided with strategies to support their children to further progress at home, at: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 31  · Parent/Teacher Conferences (4 times in the year) · Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays (once monthly facilitated by classroom teachers and coaches) · Open House events, such as Meet the Teach, classroom celebrations such as publishing parties facilitated by key staff members · Scheduled Curricula workshops facilitated by coaches, teachers and administration Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. DIBELs, MasterConnect, I-Ready, After School Instructional programs Funding for Consultants Funding for per session teacher teams to plan Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teacher teams will have examined the available data including F&P and i-Ready data, and 60% of students will be ‘Approaching Grade Level’ Judge the successful implementation of our PD Plan based on classroom observation and teacher feedback using Advance Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will analyze student data using Mastery Connect, teacher created trackers and IReady Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. As a result of our collection and use of mid year reading data we are on track for meeting this goal. MID YEAR READING DATA BY GRADE 1stGr. 97 students – Level 1 Below 60%, Working Towards 12%, At 15%, Above 13% 2018-19 SCEP-FF 32  2ndGr. 90 students – Level 1 Below 56%, Working Towards 17%, At 20%, Above 7% 3rdGr. 77 students – Level 1 Below 39%, Working Towards 35%, At 5%, Above 21% 4thGr. 87 students – Level 1 Below 51%, Working Towards 8%, At 11%, Above 30% 5thGr. 75 students – Level 1 Below 38%, Working Towards 15%, At 31%, Above 16% JANUARY ’19 GAINS INTERIM MATH ASSESSMENTS CLASS AVERAGES Kinder: Class 001 +3%, 002 +16%, 003 + 24%, 021 +13%, 831 -1% Grade 1: Class 101 +4%, 103 -5%, 121 +2%, 131 -4%, 831 +31% Grade 2: Class 201 +16%, 221 -7%, 231 +1%, 631 +5% Grade 3: Class 301 +23%, 321 -2%, 331 +5% Grade 4: Class 401 +31%, 421 -3%, 431 +20%, 731 +17% Grade 5: Class 501 +4%, 521 +14%, 531 +1%, 731 +43% Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 33  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Tenet 2 – School Leader Practices and Decisions – as this work has shown improvements in lesson planning and preparation we are encouraged to increase our efforts to provide professional mentoring so that continued student outcomes occur. At PS 443 structures are designed to maximize strategic planning Teacher teams meet regularly throughout the week during their 6th additional preparation period for common planning and to monitor and review student outcomes data and adapt the units to include multiple entry points for ELLs, SWDs, struggling students and advanced students. During this time teachers work collaboratively to disseminate professional development learning, share new unit information, and refine and revise units of study. The master schedule was strategically created to allow for weekly common planning within grade teams in addition to the common preparation periods; so time could be devoted to editing and revising the school’s curriculum that they are aligned to the CCLS, Engaging, interdisciplinary and rigorous. In addition Programs and teacher schedules provide for Push-in services (ESL), Dual Language and SMALL GROUP INSTRUCTION. So that students are not being pulled for these services and missing out on classroom instruction. Instructional leaders have been able to nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff to raise awareness of the need to raise expectations within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 34  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 4: By June 2019, 100% of our teachers will have identified goals for themselves and created an action plan using Danielson’s Framework for Teaching aligned to student and teacher needs and will result in a 5% increase in their MOTP score 2018-19 SCEP-FF 35  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) We will conduct PD to revisit all aspects of Domain 3 Instruction: All - Using assessment for instruction Teachers Sept.18- Nov '19 Administration, Literacy and Math Coach - Monitoring student learning - Feedback to students - Student self-assessment and monitoring of progress. Supervisors will conduct informal and/or formal classroom observations and provide teachers with formative feedback to ensure instruction is aligned with the Danielson Framework Targeted teachers Nov.18- June '19 Supervisors, Instructional Coaches Supervisors, in collaboration with teachers, will develop individual professional development plan for each teacher based on classroom observations and student data Supervisors will set up regular meetings with teachers rated as "Developing" to track progress across the year toward their professional learning goals. Across all grades we will support our teacher teams in planning assessment that is fully integrated into instruction, through extensive use of formative assessments. Additionally, the teams will use Protocols for examining student work and review Mastery Connect and I-Ready to assess their achievement against the grade level CCLS and define areas of strength and weakness. They will develop strategies to help students know and be able to provide evidence in what way they have contributed to the grade level assessments criteria. Teachers Sept 18– June 19 Supervisors, Coaches. Grade Teams 2018-19 SCEP-FF 36  Teams will build a repertoire of forms of feedback, from teacher that is accurate and specific and advances learning. Teachers will be coached, as necessary to successfully differentiate instruction to address individual students' misunderstandings through the roving and 1:1 conferences, throughout instruction. Teams will be supported to foster methods for students to self-assess and monitor their own progress. All classes will conduct baseline assessments and review the baseline data to devise Grade 2-5 After School Lists of targeted students. All teachers will strategize intervention for struggling students, ELLs, SWDs and/or add enrichment approaches, as deemed appropriate. Grade Teams will meet with ESL and SETTS providers to share information on the progress of the subgroups. All Staff Sept.18-June 19 Supervisors, Coaches, Grade Teams 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Administration and Parent Coordinator will ensure that parents and families are supported in understanding the level of rigor required and provided with strategies to support their children to further progress at home, at: · Parent/Teacher Conferences (4 times in the year) · Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays · Open House events, such as Meet the Teach, classroom celebrations such as publishing parties · Scheduled Curricula workshops Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. -Budget lines for instructional coaches - Resources for The 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions - Per-Session funds for teachers to work after-school and Saturday Academy - Educational Software for the purchase of software MasteryConnect 2018-19 SCEP-FF 37  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. -Tracking i-Ready math and literacy data towards a 6% improvement in student proficiency levels during Mid year assessment period (February 2019) -Quality of examination of student work samples (unit trackers, interim assessments) by teachers through Mastery Connect (February 2019) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Mastery Connect data base and teacher created trackers Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. MID YEAR READING DATA BY GRADE 1stGr. 97 students – Level 1 Below 60%, Working Towards 12%, At 15%, Above 13% 2ndGr. 90 students – Level 1 Below 56%, Working Towards 17%, At 20%, Above 7% 3rdGr. 77 students – Level 1 Below 39%, Working Towards 35%, At 5%, Above 21% 4thGr. 87 students – Level 1 Below 51%, Working Towards 8%, At 11%, Above 30% 5thGr. 75 students – Level 1 Below 38%, Working Towards 15%, At 31%, Above 16% Mid-Year Reading Assessment: Lower Grade (1stGrade) of 97 students in 27 students have assessed At and Above Grade Level – 28% Upper Grade (4th Grade) of 87 students in 36 students have assessed At and Above Grade Level – 41% JANUARY ’19 GAINS INTERIM MATH ASSESSMENTS CLASS AVERAGES Kinder: Class 001 +3%, 002 +16%, 003 + 24%, 021 +13%, 831 -1% Grade 1: Class 101 +4%, 103 -5%, 121 +2%, 131 -4%, 831 +31% Grade 2: Class 201 +16%, 221 -7%, 231 +1%, 631 +5% Grade 3: Class 301 +23%, 321 -2%, 331 +5% Grade 4: Class 401 +31%, 421 -3%, 431 +20%, 731 +17% Grade 5: Class 501 +4%, 521 +14%, 531 +1%, 731 +43% Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 38  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X X X SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We provide outreach and engage parents and community members in the educational process. As stated in our vision, “The Family School is a rigorous, inquiry-based learning environment modeled after a nurturing home. Through our supportive learning environment, students, staff and families will collaboratively create an educational lifestyle that extends beyond the six hours of the school day.” In order for the school's strategy and practices to align with the concepts in the Highly Effective column of Tenet 6 the school should further enhance family engagement by establishing through the parent coordinator and community partnerships a core of parent leaders that work collaboratively to teach all parents ways to support student learning and growth. Opportunities for student voice an leaderships can be seen during weekly student council meetings. Weekly breakfast with the principal advisory group and students leaders who are a part of the PBIS committee. In addition we also have a  Wellness Committee  Basketball Team -campus games to foster relationship between both schools on the campus 2018-19 SCEP-FF 39 School Messenger phone system School created parent survey School DoJo, Monday Funday activities, Student of the Month Awards Ceremonies     Curriculum Nights, Parent Breakfasts, monthly parent engagement meetings  Biweekly principal newsletter to staff Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. GOAL 5: By June 2019 we will establish through the parent coordinator and community partnerships a core of parent leaders that work collaboratively to teach all parent ways to support student learning and growth, resulting in a 10% increase in the approval rating of Parent Responses in the 2019 School Survey (P) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 40  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will engage in training in TCIS and SEL activities for creating a more culturally responsive learning environment which supports equity and access for all Sept.18- June 19 Teachers, Parents and families Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) PTA President, Teachers, Administration Parent Coordinator, Coaches Regular communications are distributed to the entire school community that outlines monthly units of study being undertaken by each grade along with expected learning outcomes Parents receive teacher invitations to make appointments for discussion during the scheduled Parent Engagement Periods on Tuesdays Families receive assessment information at regular intervals throughout the school year During Parent Teacher Conferences and Tuesday Parent Engagement time, parents/guardian are provided with information as to how they can support their child's improved learning outcomes in meeting and exceeding the state standards. Our Parent Coordinator plans, schedules and widely advertises inside and outside the school and School Messenger Parent Workshops. She conducts each workshop, with the assistance of Instructional Leaders, as appropriate. We have devised a specific Parent Point System that will support this goal and be implemented by the Parent Coordinator Parents, Students Sept.18- June 19 PTA President Administration Parent Coordinator Teachers, Coaches 2018-19 SCEP-FF 41  Develop a common grade-level communication in the form of monthly parent newsletters to parents informing them of upcoming curricular goals and ways they can support their children at home in accomplishing these goals. Develop our partnership with the CBO‘ Measurable Achievement – Achievement Lab” to serve students K-5, providing a structured extended-day program to advance participants in enrichment and academic areas through hands-on activities. Achievement Lab has a Parent Involvement element including wellness program that encompasses health in mind and body. Parents Students Sept.18- June 19 Administration Parent Coordinator Achievement Lab Parents have been invited to and have been a part of a multitude of school-wide events such as Literacy Fair, Saturday Academy, athletic activities, awards ceremony, monthly parent workshops and breakfasts as well as monthly assemblies and our spelling bee. Parents Students Sept.18- June 19 Administration Coaches Teachers Special assemblies such as, events held that acknowledge student achievement including awards and athletic activities to promote parent participation. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. District-wide events will be widely promoted to provide opportunities for families to engage in learning strategies which can support the social emotional development of habits of mind leading to college and career readiness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator Funding for events and communications Weekly 40 Minute parent engagement Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding X C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 42  February 2019 tally all events and workshops that have taken place measuring the attendance as per sign in sheets which will show a 5% increase in Parent involvement as compared to February 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. February (2019) Report for Goal 5 will be measured by comparing attendance at meetings to the prior years attendance. Looking for a 5% increase in attendance. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. Currently we are on track to meet and even supersede this goal. The school has a new Pre-K thrive program that has offered the parents weekly parenting classes on Thursday morning. These parenting classes along with the schools continued initiatives that are outlined in this goal has the school parent attendance rate as of February 2019 up by 18%. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 43  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small Group Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Pull out activities during the school day Pull out activities during the school day Small Group . Pull out activities during the school day Small Group . Pull out activities during the school day One-to-one or small group counseling Pull out activities during the school day Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) All Level 1 and 2 Students All Level 1 and 2 Students Science All Level 1 and 2 Students Social Studies All Level 1 and 2 Students At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Students that are identified based on number of recorded incidents in school wide incident reporting system Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Recipe for reading based on Fountas & Pinnell Screener Math skills based on data provided from classroom assessments and Reflex Math Small group strategies (hands on activities with the use of science tools) that follow the NYC Science Scope and Sequence. Small group strategies (peer mentoring, repeated explicit instruction) that follow the NYC Scope and Sequence Self Esteem leads to academic excellence. Anti-bullying curriculum. Anger Management, Impulse control, and conflict resolution strategies. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 44  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 28 students are currently attending PS443 and are in Temporary Housing 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Emergency school supplies are provided, such as book bags, pencils, uniforms We will ensure each student has all necessary education supplies such as fiction and non-fiction texts Individual and family counselling based on referrals and expressed need from the family and/or the student Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 45  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FF 46  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our strategies for recruitment include utilizing the schools’ 18D hiring committee. This committee consists of administrators, teachers and select parents. Beginning in February, teachers are asked to predict if they will return the following year. Based on the responses a search begins using the New Teacher Finder and conversations with colleagues past and present within and outside of New York City. When Open Market becomes available, vacancies are posted. Candidates are invited to visit the school informally to determine if they will fit in with the school’s culture. Next, candidates sit for an interview where it is determined if the candidate is a person of interest. The candidate does a demonstration lesson which is observed by administrators and teachers. Where appropriate, students are asked for feedback about the candidate’s teaching. After all candidates are interviewed, the committee meets to make selections. We have a criteria for looking at resumes, recommendations, portfolios, and writing samples. At PS443 we involve teachers, as part of their grade team, to participate in critical decision making about the direction of planning for CCLS alignment, topics, resources and assessment strategies, within the framework of NYCDOE and PS443 Instructional guidelines. Opinions and feedback is valued and sought out and teachers are encouraged to develop ownership and pride in the schools achievements. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 SCEP-FF 47  Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). New Teacher Center program involving training in mentoring for experienced teachers to mentor new teachers. We retain these teachers by providing differentiated professional development to increase teacher growth in instructional practice, using a common teaching framework. All new teachers receive mentors, based on their licensing area. We utilize the resources of the BFSC. This school year we have focused our schools Professional Learning Plan around our instructional focus of increasing students’ academic vocabulary. We started this year’s professional development with our instructional retreats which focused on building trust and teamwork amongst our staff. We have also had teachers fill our individualized professional development plans which required teachers to reflect on their practices and areas for growth. Based on their professional plan teachers have attended outside professional developments, after attending these learning opportunities teachers are tasked with turn keying these sessions for staff members in small group settings during our Monday PD block. Teachers are also engaging in common planning periods that are facilitated by graduates of the NYCDOE Teacher Leader Program and 2014-2015 program participants. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). For children who are going to kindergarten from our Pre-K classes In early April, the students will be given the opportunity to visit the kindergarten classes several times throughout the year to make for a smoother transition. When preschool and kindergarten classes do joint activities. Reaching out once we have our list of incoming Pre-k and Kindergarten students we will encourage the families to:  Attend an open house in the fall (many schools have these)  Attend orientation in the spring  Visit the school and meet the kindergarten teacher  Shop for school supplies (teachers typically provide a list) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 48  Communication between teachers In addition to thinking about children and families, we also realize that it is also good for preschool and kindergarten teachers to network, share information, and do joint planning. So during the Monday Professional development time teachers across grades have the opportunity to participate in discussion groups in which preschool, kindergarten, and first grade teachers get together to talk about common issues. This networking shows families that teachers are working together to ensure all children learn and make progress toward achieving early learning standards. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are openly encouraged to participate in the review, selection and use of appropriate multiple assessment measures during weekly common planning time, which is built into their schedules. Weekly, during the 80 minute professional development session, along with the weekly common planning grade team meetings, teachers engage in the activities of interpreting and using assessment results to improve instruction. We encourage pride in the our successes and a sense of ownership of the planning and implementation of our goals for continuing to improve learning outcomes. Our approach to the use of assessment is simple; assessment should have a purpose at every level for everyone involved. Students should be given appropriate feedback on their learning from the formative and summative assessments carried out by teachers. Class teachers use formative assessment to support planning and implementation of a curriculum designed to meet the needs of learners. Teachers use these assessments to help ensure that students who need specified intervention are quickly identified, appropriately supported and monitored so that all can fully achieve their potential and no one is left to struggle behind. As a school, summative assessments are used as a tool for monitoring student progress and to ensure the school is helping students achieve their potential. Summative data helps us make decisions on a larger scale with regard to curriculum purchases, outside consultant support, inter-visitations, Lab-site development, internal and external professional development. What has our assessment data revealed We are not seeing a correlation between our Teachers College Fountas and Pinnell Running Record growth and student achievement levels on our NYS exams. It became clear after some debrief and refinement that running records were not being done uniformly across all classrooms on grade levels. Staff members were also concerned that these screeners were too time consuming and our data was not warehoused in a way that made it easily accessible, therefore making the time consuming process less than ideal. The use of DIBELS on iPad’s help to consolidate our data to increase the efficiency of our analytical processes. Through the use of DIBELS we have identified measures of phonemic awareness, Phoneme Segmentation Fluency (PSF) which helped teachers to support students reading acquisition during small group instruction. To assist with the continuity and validity of running records, coaches work directly with an AIS teacher, who administers running records. In addition, the AIS teacher confirms accuracy and leveling scores with quick check ins as well as whole class support. Staff have had grade-level conversations around running record scoring and has also attended professional development around the new school-wide Online Data Management System (ODMS), which directly uploads running record data from individual ipads. Teachers can now administer running records digitally and all data is saved and warehoused. This elimitates the use of paper copies, increases fidelity as students can only cold-read a text one time and all assessments can be viewed via PDF files saved to the ODMS site. Additionally, scoring is 2018-19 SCEP-FF 49  now an algorithm that is automatically scored once the running record is administered, lessening the possibility of scoring errors. Using assessment data to adjust curricula and instruction  MasteryConnect is used to track and analyze data, to inform individual action plans, and to create small group instruction and whole group review; also providing skill-specific resources.  RTI screener: “DIBELS” used to assess Tier 1 instruction and inform Tier 2 instruction for at-risk students. Use of multiple forms of assessments, as identified in daily classroom practices of our Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best.  Teacher teams looking at student work include collaboratively identifying implications for next steps teaching, related to the evidence of the student work products. This work is done weekly during the 6th additional prep each teacher was given. The teams use an inquiry approach to the work and Data Wise Protocols to support this work. Large number of teachers selected Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques in Instruction (Danielson component 3b and 3d using assessment in instruction) as an annual professional goal. Professional Development, therefore, will focus on supporting this professional practice.  4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal 461,000.00 NA 75,997 13,800.00 x NA x x Column B Section Reference(s) Section 5A , 5B NA Section 5A, 5B,5E Section 5B, 5D, 5E 2018-19 SCEP-FF 50  Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Local 95,463.00 NA 3,421,261.00 x NA x Section5A NA Section 5A, 5B 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-2018-19 SCEP-FF 51  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 52  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X443, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The Family School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 53  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 2018-19 SCEP-FF 54  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X443, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 2018-19 SCEP-FF 55  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 56  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-FF 57  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 2018-19 SCEP-FF 58  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 59 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 3 9 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FF 60  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials Rationale: Schedule and Duration Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served:&nbsp; Begin description here: · The After-School program, in collaboration with the classroom teachers, will provide additional instruction and activities with the following goals: -To substantially strengthen the reading, writing, listening and speaking skills of the beginning and intermediate level ELL students. -To raise the percentage of ELL students reaching English proficiency to 20%. -To promote more participation in content area classrooms and improved performance of ELLs. -To develop ELL students’ higher order thinking skills using work model approaches that engage ELL students in critical thinking and Principles of Learning. -To empower ELL students to become accountable for their learning. · This program will be extending an invitation to up to 60 students. It will be offered to ELLs in 1st and 2nd grade as well as newcomer ELL students from 3rd-5th grade. There will be 5 classes of 15 students each. Two 1st grade classes, two 2nd grade classes and one 3rd -5th newcomer class. Each class will have one ENL/ Bilingual certified Teacher. · Days: Wednesdays and Thursdays (35 sessions) Start Date: 10/17/2018 End Date: 2/28/2019 Time: 2:30-4:30 · English will be used as the main language of instruction with support in students' first language when needed. · 5 teachers will be taking part in this program, 2 ENL and 3 Bilingual Certified teachers. The lessons to be taught will be planned to allow for ENL methodologies and strategies to be infused within the after school curriculum. · Students in the ELL After School Program will be engagement in direct instruction, center activities, interactive smart board games and board games. These activities will build social skill as well as address the academic needs of ELLs. Language of Instruction:&nbsp; Teachers:&nbsp; Activities: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 61  Materials: Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information · Continental Press-Practice exercises in basic English( level A,B & C), Learning to Sequence: 3, 4 and 6 scene sets, Nouns, Verbs and Adjectives Photo Learning Cards, Early Learning Skills Photo Learning Cards, Big Box of Word Chunks, Word by Word Picture Dictionary Eng/Span, Hot Dots Academic vocabulary cards and board games( Time to Rhyme, Big Box of word Chunks Name that Word) .These materials are supplementary materials to materials used during daily instruction and are only used for the ELL after school program. · All Afterschool records including student attendance, parent notification letters, and signed permission slips will be kept in an After school Binder in Room M174. Records: rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: Topic 1: Content strategies for ELL’s Rationale: These workshops will place emphasis on building academic vocabulary in support of the Citywide Instructional Expectations with a goal of strengthening student work and teacher practice for ELLs. Dates: 10/10/18 &10/11/18 Time: 2:20pm-3:30pm Name of Provider: Paulina Akonu-Atta (ENL Teacher) Audience: ELL After school Teachers This PD will be at a cost to the program. Records of attendance and agendas will be kept in an After school Binder in Room M174. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · rationale schedule and duration 2018-19 SCEP-FF 62  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · · · topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Begin description here: At P.S. 443 The Family School we believe that the most effective forms of parent involvement are those which engage parents in working directly with their children on learning activities at the school and teaching them to also work on assignments with their children at home. We also celebrate the different cultures in our school and promote cultural awareness and appreciation. We try to make every opportunity a learning experience not only for the students but also for their parents/guardians. Topic 1:Title III Information Session for Parents(1 session) Rationale: Parents will be informed about the goals, structure and purpose of the Title III program for their child Provider: Laura OWen (ENL Teacher) Date: October 16, 2018 time: 2:20 -3:30pm Audience: Parents of ELLs This Information session will be at no cost to the program. Topic 2: NYSESLAT Information Session for Parents (1 session) Rationale: Parents will understand the components and demands of the NYSESLAT exam for their child. They will be informed of the progress their child has made on the NYSESLAT and the expectations. Provider: Paulina Akonu-Atta (ENL Teachers) Date: April 16, 2019 Time: 2:25pm-3:30pm Audience: Parents of ELLs This Information session will be at no cost to the program. Topic 3: “Family Breakfast” (6 sessions) Rationale: This encourages parents to come and learn about their child’s school, ask questions and be a part of the school community.It is an opportunity for families to come to their children's classrooms from 10 am - 11am. This time enables families to participate in their children's learning and better understand how to help their children with schoolwork at home. This is particularly helpful for ELL families that are otherwise not able to assist their children with homework. The time allows the families to feel more of a part of the learning community and provide resources they need to help ensure their child success in the school and at home. Date: 9/28, 10/26, 1/22, 3/29, 4/26, 5/24 Time: 8:00 am-11:00am Name of Provider: Millicent Matos (parent coordinator), Rowena Penn (Principal) Audience: All parents including parents of ELLs. The Family Breakfast will be at no cost to the program. How Parents Are Notified: Parents are notified via letters sent home with children in their home/school communication folders. The letters are translated into several languages for the diverse populations represented in our school. Additionally, there will be fliers posted around the school in the different home 2018-19 SCEP-FF 63 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities languages, notifying parents of workshops. Last, the parent coordinator, classroom teacher and/or ENL teacher reaches out to parents to notify them in person and on the phone. Interpreters are provided for all parent engagement activities. In cases where there are no interpreters, the Translation and Interpretation unit is used. All records of Parent Engagement activities : Agendas, Parent Notification letters, fliers and attendance sheets are maintained in a binder in the main Office. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 2018-19 SCEP-FF 64  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name THE FAMILY SCHOOL Borough Bronx School Number 443 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Rowena Penn Coach NA ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Paulina Akonu-Atta Teacher/Subject Area KatieGendykowski/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Laura Owen/ENL Related-Service Provider Ida Eyzagurrie Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Assistant Principal Nycole Smith Coach NA School Counselor Kerryanne Torres Parent Gisele Miranda Parent Coordinator Millicent Matos Field Support Center Staff Member Luis Quan Other (Name and Title) NA C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 3 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 6 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 568 2018-19 SCEP-FF 65 Total number of ELLs 177 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.16%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): NA If yes, indicate language(s): SPANISH Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 4 K 1 2 Spanish 2014-15 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 3 0 1 1 5 0 1 1 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 6 0 0 6 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Our formative assessment tools used for literacy and math are mostly the same for lower grades as they are for upper grades; We are currently using Fountas and Pinnell running records, DIBELS (with a progress monitoring assessment for far below grade level ELLS based specifically on areas of individual student need), pre-tests at the beginning of Math and ELA units, exit slips during many ELA and Math lessons as well as in ENL small groups. Students use self-assessment tools such as gestures, thumbs up or down and colored/numbered cards in order to show understanding. In addition, teachers observe and assess students using checklists, conference notes, informal running records, and module assessments during whole and small group lessons and work time. In addition to the aforementioned, ENL teachers are creating ongoing listening, reading, writing and speaking assessments to track student's progress within each modality. Classroom teachers give spelling tests to monitor areas of need in terms of word parts and spelling patterns and use vocabulary assessments before beginning a unit in Math or ELA to ensure ELLs have access to the specific vocabulary they may not already know. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 66  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Teachers work on grade teams together at least once a week to monitor and discuss the data collected from formative assessments. We have also met as a school and broken up into groups on set Mondays to discuss questioning and discussion techniques that will support our teachers and our ELLs. Data is collected by our school for running records and DIBELS and is compiled into an Excell document that all teachers have access to. This ensures accountability and gives teachers and administration access to summative data measures. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by collecting and analyzing data to look for patterns and commonalities. Our school uses the data from EDAT as a jump off point for the current year, looking to see which specific areas within each modality students excelled and underperformed in. These data points give us specific ways to tailor instruction for our ELLs in order to see growth on the assessments we give during the school year as well as the NYSESLAT at the end of the year. Through conversations with classroom teachers, we also discuss and problem solve to better meet students needs and ensure success. Every student works towards a content and language goal in each lesson, and once those goals are met, they work with the teachers to create and master new goals. All ELLs take the BOY, MOY, EOY NYC Writing Performance Task and are assessed using Fountas and Pinnell Running Records at BOY, MOY, EOY to show baseline, areas of need and progress made. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our school has an RTI team that meets weekly to discuss interventions for ELLs and monolingual students. The ENL team meets weekly to discuss noticings amongst the grades and students we work with in order to address interventions should they be deemed necessary. We are currently part of a pilot program through DIBELS called AMPLIFY in which select underperforming students in grades K-2, many of them being ELLS, are given 30 minutes per day of literacy support by a trained interventionist. Grade teams also meet weekly during common planning time to address interventions and discuss data during an inquiry based meeting time. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The Family School uses DIBELS as a schoolwide screener at the beginning, middle and end of the year as well as for progress monitoring in between. Based on student assessments (Fountas and Pinnell running records, Math assessments, Writing Performance Tasks, MOSL) students are placed in different flexible homogenous groups according to the skills they need to improve upon and the goals they are working towards. We look at classwide and gradewide data to determine Tier 1 or Tier 2 interventions and have used Lexia, Reflex Math, Recipe for Reading and Fundations. We also began a newcomer program that meets in the mornings to focus on assimilation into the school and new culture of the community as well as survival English and basic academic speaking, listening reading and writing skills. As mentioned above, the AMPLIFY pilot program directly relates to ELLs and RTI, with our lowest performing ELLs in grades k-2 in respect to early reading skills. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Our school mostly uses the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. With respect to both of these outcome assessments, we place newcomer entering and emerging students into small groups to provide them with targeted and specific ENL instruction in addition to the content lessons they work on with their classroom teacher or ENL provider. Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding Students are grouped a bit more flexibly depending on the lesson and content being delivered. Using the information gained about each modality and how students performed in each area, flexible groups are created in order to provide students the support they need within and across modalities. We also look at the EDAT to support in the creation of ELL groups based on all the assessment data we have available in one place. This year, we also focused on ELL students in grades 3,4 and 5 who scored at a level 2 on the ELA State Test with the hopes of helping them to perform at a higher level in ELA and thus in ENL. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 67  7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? As mentioned above, the ENL team meets weekly to discuss noticings and data and spends a great deal of time in the beginning of the year, middle of the year and end of the year discussing appropriate groupings in regard to data and performance noted throughout the school year. With respect to the NYSITELL and the NYSESLAT, we have noticed several patterns based on the meetings we have as a team. On the NYSESLAT In kindergarten, for example, many more students scored at an Beginner level than the Advanced level as compared to the other grades. Many more students in the upper grades, however, score at the transitioning and comanding levels. This demonstrates that as students progress through the grade levels they are reaching higher proficiency levels Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. This program has a combined push in/pull out method of instruction. Students are pulled from multiple classes within and across grades in order for the ENL teacher to provide services. Both homogenous and heterogeneous groups are created based on students needs that allow them to have access to the classroom content as well as work on their language needs based on their proficiency level. Instruction is scaffolded and differentiated to incorporate the range of language proficiencies within a group. In this ENL program, instruction is delivered via whole group, small group and individual meetings. ENL teachers collaborate with Common Branches teachers for the implementation of the integrated model. Teachers plan together and co teaching or station teach to provide ELLS with Content through the use of ELL strategies. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Our Spanish dual language programs are offered in grades K-5 with the DL teacher providing the home Language support and ENL services to the entire class, including all ELLs. DL classes alternate insruction in English and Spanish, day by day. One day the teacher will teach in English and the next day in Spanish and so on. the DL Teacher provided the 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The Family School P.S. 443 offers , dual-language, and self-contained ENL classrooms, in addition to push-in services. There are two ENL teachers who push-in in order to meet the appropriate mandates. Support is given in the native language through preview/review, modifying materials, small groups to discuss content in Spanish. Lessons are differentiated by grouping students according to their language proficiency and areas of need. Native Language Arts in Spanish is provided one period a day through content area instruction. For ELLs, in ENL, and dual-language classes, 360 minutes of instruction are provided for Entering and Emerging ELLs, while 180 minutes of ELL instruction are provided for Transitioning and Expanding students. Commanding Students continue to receive 90 minutes of ELL instruction for two years. In ENL, mandated minutes are met through self-contained ENL classes or through 2018-19 SCEP-FF 68  push-in/ Pull-out services. ENL teachers teach all content areas in English using a variety of supportive methodology. Push-in ENL teachers push in primarily during the literacy block to best address listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Our goal is to help ELLs attain English language proficiency and for them to meet or exceed NY State and City Standards. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Students are provided with multiple sources of information in order to assist them in building background knowledge and meaning about a concept through learner-centered instruction. In all content areas, strategies for working with ELLs are utilized, such as graphic organizers, visuals, vocabulary introduction, small grouping with the teacher (in native language in DL). Native language materials are prevalent throughout the school in classroom libraries, including general education classrooms, DLclassrooms, and during ENL lessons. Home language materials are also available in the school library. Social Studies: Social Studies instruction is done in English through CCLS. Materials in English are available at many different levels. In order to express understanding through products students in DL can express their understanding in Spanish. Math: The instruction may switch to English instruction, but materials are available for them to complete their work in Spanish. Assessments are made available in both languages so that they can show understanding of the content area knowledge. In order for students to have more meaningful conversations about math (a focus of Go Math), students can participate in both English and Spanish. Previews and reviews in Spanish are provided during math instruction. Science: Science is taught in English with a preview and review in the native language (only in TBE setting). Vocabulary is a key focus to prepare students for more hands-on investigations. Language Arts/Literacy Development Complex cognitive/literacy processes ie: prediction, inferring, making connections is scaffolded in English. • The modules make concepts more explicit when taught in English. Visual aids and language experience charts support learning. Hands-on products make content more engaging and accessible. • (In DL) Bilingual Centers/(In ENL) Centers: Learning/Task/Observation Centers that help students acquire content knowledge through exploration and interaction with materials that re-enforce and complement themes in addition to hands-on projects. • Content support and conceptual development are offered through differentiated instruction (i.e. small groups, visual/audio/kinesthetic support, scaffolded/tiered assignments). Linguistic pre-view/review/summary is given in small groups to students who need extra support in the native language (in TBE) and in English in ENL to make content area concepts accessible. Comprehensive Literacy Plan: Students are supported with both English and NLA development (in some components of Balanced Literacy in DL) through the following balanced literacy model: Read Aloud (HLA), Guided Reading, Independent Reading (HLA), Unison Reading, Writing Demonstrations (persuasive, narrative, and informational), Shared Writing, Response to Literature and Independent Writing Children will have opportunities for: Speaking, listening, reading, and writing experiences for a variety of authentic/meaningful purposes and audiences in both the Home Language and English Language. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Spanish Lab is administered to new admits with Spanish as a home language. Writing: Writing assignments are allowed to be done in Spanish to see students’ skills in their native language. Reading: Informal assessments/conferences are done early on to determine their comfort level in reading (ability to decode and comprehend). F&P assessments also done in both English and Spanish Idel is also used to progress monitor DL students. Math: Math assessments are available in Spanish. Content areas: Students can demonstrate their understanding in Spanish if necessary (written or oral). Standardized assessments (ELE) are also administered in 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade bilingual classes. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 2018-19 SCEP-FF 69  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a)SIFE students are Provided with small group instruction through AIS to address their individual academic needs and to provide the background knowledge they need to be successful in the classroom. b) Spanish-speaking families of newcomers may choose between the TBE, Dual Language, and ESL programs for their children. These children will be assessed through Easy CBM, Go Math assessments, and other work samples that show mastery of CCLS. In the Dual Language, and Self-Contained classes, appropriately-certified classroom teachers will provide mandated ESL units. An after-school program will be implemented for Spanish-speaking upper-grade newcomers (3rd, 4th, and 5th) to receive literacy support in their native language as well as Basic English skills. In addition, 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade newcomers spend 20 minutes each morning with an ENL or bilingual teacher to practice fluency, basic conversations and basic English skills. Within the classroom, centers will be utilized to help students learn basic skills, and in the classroom they will have partnerships that will help them navigate their new classroom and school and utilize their English. Families with linguistic backgrounds other than Spanish will be served with the ENL program. These children will be assessed through Easy CBM, Go Math, and other work samples that show mastery of CCLS. In General Education classes, ENL Push-in mandated units will be provided by ENL teachers. Extra support will be provided to students who are not meeting grade-level bench marks. c)For the ELLs in this category, we have identified the students’ modalities that are most in need of strengthening. We have analyzed the results of the NYSESLAT in order to pin-point whether the needs lie in reading or writing, because in our school these two areas are generally weakest. For writing, ENL teachers have been forming small strategy groups with these students that are based on assignments, informal assessments and conference notes data. In these groups, students have the opportunity to work on specific skills such as paragraph writing, using descriptive language, or grammatical points including subject-verb agreement and correct English sentence structure. In reading, these students also benefit from strategy groups within Guided Reading. d) LTE's are provided with small group instruction. the Family school uses the RTI process to identify and address these students individual needs. e) FELL's continue to receive 90 minutes of Push-in ENL services for two years. They also receive ELL testing accommodations during those two years. During this time, FELL's are placed in small strategic groups based on assessments. Here their individual academic needs are addressed. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? One instructional strategy that is used for ELL-SWDs that provides access to academic content areas and English language development is flexible grouping. Both students with disabilities and language learners are paired with general education students. This model helps to provide this particular group of students with exemplars of academic content and language. Another instructional strategy that is used in the classroom is learning centers. Learning centers give language learners and SWDs the opportunity to engage in small group instruction with hands-on activities. All ELL SWDs receive mandated ESL requirements according to their proficiency level. ELL-SWDs whose IEP mandates monolingual instruction without ESL are provided with the ESL mandated requirements according to proficiency level. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers are given the opportunity to scaffold and modify curriculum and instruction based on students’ needs and goals on their IEPs. Many of our students that are labeled as language learners and SWDs are receiving SETSS services, which is one of the least restrictive environments that can be provided with an IEP. All these interventions are part of a teacher’s schedule and administration has allowed the flexibility for these learning opportunities to take place in the classroom. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 70  Our SIFE, Newcomers, longterm ELL's and SWDs are offered different intervention programs and are part of the schools RTI. ELLs in tier II in ELA receive intervention through LEXIA, and Recipy for Ready while Reflex Math is used as the Math intervention for tier ELLs in Tier II. ELLs-SWD are placed in an ICT class where they are provided with two teachers. They are also integrated with general education students that serve as appropriate models in both language and in the content areas. Teachers work in small group instruction with these targeted students. These students are also part of our after school and ELL Saturday Academy programs. These programs have been formed for at risk students or students with high needs to ensure progression through small group instruction. ELLs with disabilities are eligible to receive intervention through SETTS in literacy and math. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? The school will be introducing the Passport social studies curriculum which will be integrated with ELA. we will also be using Fountas and Pinnel Benchmark assessments for ELA. Eureka Math will also be replacing the GoMath curriculum to address our school needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? n/a 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ELLs receive physical education, music and art according to Part 100 requirements. Enrichment opportunities and all after-school programs are open to all students including ELLs. ELL students participate in all these offerings. The Family School is offering The Rising Stars after-school program, a Title I program, which supports test preparation for the ELA and Math state tests. Title III Immigrant Funding supports ELLs in preparation for the NYSESLAT. Regular Title III funding supports newcomers in literacy and oral language development. Both Title III programs are targeted for English Language Learners and occur after-school. General education teachers are supported through professional development workshops on best practices for ELLs. Also, TBE/ESL/Dual Language teachers plan collaboratively with general education teachers to support the use of best practices for ELLs. Bilingual classes are provided additional push-in support from paraprofessionals for over 50% of the week. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional materials are used to support ELLs in ELA such as Wilson Fundations and Words Their Way. Realia, manipulatives, SMART boards, ipads, computer programs including Lexia, access to a computer lab and classroom laptop carts for each grade are also available. Computerised reading programs such as lexia is used to provide support in reading listening. teachers also make use of ipads and the smart board when introducing new vocabulary. this helps provide background knowledge and connections. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? ELLs receive native language support through literature available in Spanish. There are also glossaries, bilingual dictionaries and libraries available in ENL and Dual Language classrooms. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Grade-appropriate resources and support are provided within the Eureka Math curricula and Literacy Units of study. Teachers also provide visual and manipulatives to support students learning. We also ensure that the resources used are age and developmentally appropriate. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Building resources and materials are shared among the two schools in our building. we also collaborate to organise parent engagement activities. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 71  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our ENL team compiled a Newcomer Kit to aide students with transitioning into our school. This is available in the registration packet. There are photographs of people and places in the school, websites for parents to access in their native languages, a photo ring of basic needs students can use to practice before coming to school and while in school, such as bathroom, nurse, etc. Our bilingual/ENL teacher works with newcomer students for a minimum of two weeks to aide in the transition process. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a)In our Dual Language program, instruction is delivered in both languages. We use the 50-50 self-contained language model, which means that we teach 50% of the time in English and 50% of the time in Spanish. EP's an ELL's are integrated all day. Languages are alternated every other day. For reading, our school will be using the Benchmark Assessment System from Fountas and Pinnell in both English and Spanish. For writing, students will be writing end of unit pieces in Spanish, which will be graded using school based rubrics. In mathematics, students will be taking end of unit assessments in the target language. Besides the specific assessment for each subject, in general students will be taking base, middle and end line assessments in the target language. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We have an expansive professional development plan for ALL teachers of ELLs at The Family School. Our certified ENL and bilingual teachers attend network PDs such as ELLs and Achievement, RTI for ELLs, ELLs: Building Academic Vocabulary and others. The information and practices from these PDs are then turn-keyed to all staff, in order to ensure professional development that spans grade levels and content areas. Our ENL and bilingual teachers also plan and present in-house PDs to teachers of ELLs, such as Content Strategies for ELLs. Many of these PD’s are determined at the beginning of the year so teachers know well in advance and can also work towards an area of need. Non-pedagogue staff also receive professional development including Pd's on how to access the Translation and Interpretation Unit. All records of PD's such as the Agenda and sign-in sheets are kept in the main office. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 SCEP-FF 72  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The family school meets the required 50% ELL-specific PD for ENL and Bilingual teacher through PLC every other Mondays at this time teachers of ELLs to engage in a book study, research and share practices. On other alternating Monday, ENL/Bilingual teachers facilitate share sessions of promising practices to their colleagues, which will include topics related to ELLs. this meets the 15% ELL-specific PD requirement for all teachers. Records of PD's such as Agenda and sign-in sheets are kept on file. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During parent engagement sessions on Tuesdays, meetings are planned with parents to discuss ELL students' progress. These will be done with the ENL/Bilingual Support Teacher who, in conjunction with the classroom teacher can speak to the students' goals, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas. Interpreters and translators will be provided on the basis of need as often as possible. Teachers keep records of one-on-one meetings and phone conversations with parent in logs. Agenda and sign-in sheets of meeting are also kept on file. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. This past year, we worked diligently to ensure parental involvement and access in our school. We offered a series of parent workshops, presented by our ENL and bilingual teachers as well as community members to focus on student and parent support. Each session focused on an area such as: Looking Towards the Future: How to Support Your Child in Middle School, High School and Beyond with the Common Core, ENL Literacy Support for Parents and Students and Life Skills. We provided refreshments and sent personalized invitations home to parents of ELLs. We encourage and welcome parents to spend time in their child's classroom to get to know the curriculum and routine. All workshops are planned and organized in accordance with state standards and parents are informed of the importance of the standards as they work to help their children succeed. Agendas and sign-in sheets for all parent involvement activities are kept on file in the main office. At the family school we try our best to provide translation services during all parent activities through the use of on site staff translators and the translation and interpretation unit. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 2018-19 SCEP-FF 73 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Rowena Penn, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 74  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Family School School DBN: 09x443 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Rowena Penn Title Principal Janine Esposito Assistant Principal Millicent Matos Parent Coordinator Paulina Akonu-Atta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Gisele Miranda Parent Laura Owen/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Katie Bendykowski/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Sabriya Elam Tracy Harrison Coach Coach Kerryann Torres School Counselor Leticia Rodriguez Luis Quan Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 09/26/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 2018-19 SCEP-FF 75  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09 School Name: x443 Superintendent: Leticia Rodrigu The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No PAULINA AKONU-ATTA ENL TEACHER MILLICENT MATOS PARENT COORDINATOR na na na na na na NO YES na na YES YES na na * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During registration a Home Language Identification Survey is filled by all parents. on the survey, Parents indicate their preferred language for written and oral communication. The Family School's written translation and oral interpretation plans are based on the data collected from the HLIS. (ATS report RCPL as of June 2017). 2018-19 SCEP-FF 76  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral BENGALI FRENCH MANDINKA ENGLISH SPANISH SONINKE 13 4 2 323 295 1 2.04 0.63 0.31 50.63 46.24 0.16 15 3 3 322 293 2 2.35 0.47 0.47 50.47 45.92 0.31 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families NEWSLETTERS MONTHLY TESTING MEMOS APRIL REPORT CARDS NOVEMBER, MARCH, JUNE PROGRESS REPORTS January and March NOTICE OF SCHOOL CLOSINGS Monthly when closings occur Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated by a school staff members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed Translated by a school staff members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed Translated by a school staff members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed Translated by a school staff members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed Translated by a school staff members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed 2018-19 SCEP-FF 77  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Open School Night September Parent Orientation September and June Parent Teacher Conferences November and March Literacy Fair May/during Final PTC Weekly Parent Engagement Session Weekly during Tuesday afternoon Parent Workshops Several Workshops throughout the year interpretation service(s)? Staff Members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed Staff Members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed Staff Members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed Staff Members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed Staff Members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed Staff Members and Translation & Interpretation Unit when needed 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency, the school messenger as well as phone calls from staff members are used to contact families including families of LEP students. Staff members will be available for translation and interpretion. The Translation and Interpretation Unit is also contacted when needed. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff Members are provided with copies of Chancellors regulation A-633 at the beginning of the year and trained by the LAC on how to access and use the translation and interpretation unit. A list of staff members available for translation is posted in the main office and also provided to staff. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 2018-19 SCEP-FF 78  Posters with pictures of staff members and the different languages they speak have been pasted in vantage points in the school. These staff members are available for translation services whenever needed. We also continue to use The Translation and Interpretation Unit, parent coordinator and volunteers to meet the requirements for our school's translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parent surveys will be taken during parent - teacher conferences and other parent engagement sessions as well as informal conversations with school staff, whether in main office or classroom. Feed back from these surveys and conversations will inform the school on the changes needed to our translation and interpretation plan. 2018-19 SCEP-FF 79 
