2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 09X449 School Name: GRANT AVENUE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL Principal: KRISTIN ERAT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 2  Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: GRANT AVENUE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 320900010449 Pk-5 250 East 164 TH STREET 718-681-6288 Phone Number: School Number (DBN): 09X449 781-681-6687 Fax: KRISTIN ERAT KERAT@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Email Address: KRISTIN ERAT ANTHONY MARRA CANDACE WASHINGTON ANTHONY MARRA SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: JENRI MANZUETA 0 0 0 District Information Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: LETICIA ROSARIO Superintendent: 1245 WASHINGTON AVE LROSARIO2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-579-7140 Phone Number: 718-410-7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 3  BRONX FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: JOSE RUIZ Executive Director: 1 FORDHAMPLAZA BRONX, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-7777 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name KRISTIN ERAT ANTHONY MARRA Candace Washington Martinique Acevedo 0 0 0 Renee Speights Yaw Boateng Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT 2018-19 SCEP-FL 5  Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Daniele Andrade AIMEE THOMAS LAURA HICKERNELL Gregory Hill O 0 0 0 0 Member/ TEACHER Member/ TEACHER Member/ TEACHER Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ 0 Member/ 0 Member/ 0 Member/ 0 Member/ 0 2018-19 SCEP-FL 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 7  In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement 2018-19 SCEP-FL 8  NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 9   Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? In the Grant Avenue Elementary School community, all people are valued: we each have strengths, goals, responsibilities, and a voice. Students, families, and educators share enthusiasm and joy for learning. Lessons are meaningful, problem-centered, and tailored to student needs. Our mission is to collaboratively create a safe, supportive, and trusting environment which promotes academic excellence and risk-taking so that the possibilities for success are endless. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Our academic curriculum and school activities are planned with the success of each child in mind. We are a Teachers College Reading and Writing Project school. Our classroom teachers work closely with our TC Staff Developers, Administration, Grade Leaders, and Lead Teachers to share best instructional practices and ensure that our students are not only meeting, but exceeding NYS Standards. Our ENL and AIS programs create data-informed scaffolds to support our special populations of English Language Learners and students who benefit from small group instruction that is targeted to their individual needs. Our robust Specialty program engages students with rich arts and content-area experiences in visual arts, music, physical education, wellness, science and technology. Students investigate and explore Mathematics and Science using Go Math and FOSS lessons. Units of Study in Social Studies focus on project-based learning about our community, our neighborhood, our families, our city, our county, and our world. Collaboration with families is a priority for us as we know that the home/school partnership is essential for the success of our students. Every Friday is dedicated to “Family Fridays” when families are invited into our classrooms to engage in academic activities with their children, to Our Parent Coordinator, Guidance Counselor, Dean of School Culture, and administration host Parent Workshops on topics such as Getting to Know the Common Core, Forming Study Habits and Homework Routines, and Rally Against Bullying. Classroom teachers invite families to celebrate our young writers for “Publishing Parties” and other classroom celebrations. Each Parent Teacher Conference we are proud have well over 90% of our families in for important conversations about academic performance and progress. We have established a school culture where students are safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. From its inception, our school motto is SAFETY + TRUST + STRENGTHS = SUCCESS. We are proud of our strong results in our Learning Environment Surveys, always achieving the top-tier outcomes in Safety/Respect (2009-2013) and School Culture (2013-2014 and 2015-2016) which is now called Supportive Environment (2017-2018.) We plan to share some of our structures for cultivating a safe, supportive and trusting environment that promotes academic excellence including our Core Values advisory program. Teachers and students work together on investigations in their social-emotional learning. In 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 we made tremendous strides in improving student attendance, meeting our goal of surpassing 93% attendance school wide after 5 years of falling short of this critical benchmark. We have made strides in tightening structures and systems for student support with our team under the leadership of our Dean of School Culture, Guidance Counselor, 2018-19 SCEP-FL 11  and teacher leaders who have developed our Core Values curriculum in order support social emotional development and build self-monitoring skills. Innovations in our Reading and Math Curriculum and shifts in our pedagogical practices are resulting in increased student proficiency. Starting in 2016-2017 we shifted to Math Curriculum based on EngageNY and in building in "Persevere Periods" where our students tackle grade-level tasks and then engage in conversation based on the 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematics Discussions. In 2017-2018 we rolled out a 3 day cycle of close reading in grades 3-5 to complement our differentiated work with TCRWP by supporting students in reading grade-level texts with scaffolds and supports through a variety of priority lenses. In 2018-2019 we will expand this work to our Primary Grades. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We currently serve 113 students with disabilities which represents 25% of our total school population. We serve 110 English Language Learners which represents 25% of our total school population. For our students with disabilities and our ELLS, our theory of action is based on their needs. In response we: PROVIDE A SAFE AND TRUSTING CONTEXT FOR LEARNING BY: •Cultivating nurturing classroom and school environments with embedded social emotional supports •Nurturing well rounded students via a robust and rigorous specialty program, trips, and community collaborations •Partnering with families & STRATEGICALLY PLAN BALANCED ACADEMIC EXPERIENCES VIA: Explicit Instruction with differentiated support Opportunities to independently attack grade level texts/tasks •ELA –TC Reading and Writing Workshop •ELA Close Reading •Math Engage •5 Practices 2018-19 SCEP-FL 12  4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school has made significant progress in proficiency on the NYS ELA and Mathematics Assessments. Specifically we are now demonstrating 35% proficiency in 3-5 ELA in 2018 versus 19% proficiency in 20`17. Also of note, the school reduced the number of students performing at level 1 in ELA by 19%, from 44% of our population to 25%. In Mathematics, we had substantial gains from 2016 to 2017, moving from 12%proficiency in 2016 to 31% proficiency in 2017. Gains continued in 2018, as 34% of our 3-5 grade students were at levels 3 and 4. We acknowledge that we still have a lot of work to do in order to continue the trend of improved student outcomes. Our CEP goals are aligned with the challenges that we face together as a school community. : Key areas of focus for the school year: Rigorous Instruction/Collaborative Teachers: We strive to ensure that our students are strong readers, writers, and mathematicians and that the work in our classrooms (PreK-5) translates into improved outcomes on State Assessments. In 2018-2019 we will strengthen our practices in planning and preparing for our writing units of study and mathematics modules.Areas of focus: 1A/1E Lesson and Unit Planning and implementation with an emphasis on Writing,Engage Math Lessons, Phonics, Close Reading, and 5 Practices Persevere Periods. Vertical teams will support this work via 14 weeks of minicourses during Monday Professional Development. Effective school leadership: Our school leaders are committed to supporting teacher growth, making professional learning part of every teacher’s experience. We have established systems that support a variety of strategically planned professional development structures that foster professional learning, resulting in improved student outcomes. Administration, lead teachers, and grade leaders are active learners who also collaborate to advance teacher practice through cycles of learning and implementation. This year our area of emphasis is on supporting the school in implementing a backwards design approach to mathematics units. Supportive Environment/Strong Family and Community Ties: We will reduce chronic absenteeism by 10% and work collaboratively to boost family engagement by adding a new layer to our Family Friday tradition. The entire school community is invested in working together to bring our school mission to life each and every day at Grant Avenue Elementary School. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 13  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X449 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 439 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 76 75 26 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 19 26 26 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 95.0% % Attendance Rate 90.7% % Reduced Lunch 24.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.3% 65.1% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 0% 14% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 34.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 78% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) No N/A 32 32 92.6% 4.6% 28.2% 26.4% 4.6% 2.3% 2 8% 6.7 34.2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No Yes Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups SWD, Black, Hispanic, ED Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A NO NO YES N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 14  Economically Disadvantaged N/A ALL STUDENTS N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 15  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed X X 0 0 Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We are pleased to share increased student outcomes on the 2018 ELA Test - moving from 19%proficiency in 2017 to 35% in 2018. This demonstrates that our strategic adjustments are having a positive impact on student outcomes so we continue on with plans implemented in the 2017-2018 school year and innovate further. Our school community knows that a solid literacy foundation is critical to student success. In order to demonstrate proficiency on the State test, students need to be meeting grade-level reading benchmarks from Kindergarten to Fifth Grade. We have selected this as a goal so that we can continue to build on our work in this area as we improve our instructional strategies and increase parental involvement in this area. NYSESLAT data and Quality Review feedback also helped inform our decision-making around establishing this goal, and action plan, aligned with our instructional focus. NYSESLAT data revealed that our lowest modality is Writing. According to our Quality Review, we are Proficient in 1.1, 1.2, 2.2. These indicators all closely align with Rigorous Instruction. We are working on deeping our work around our instructional focus to increase student ownership of learning and discussion. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 16  Our instructional focus was developed in response to our State Reading Data, our NYSESLAT data, and our Quality Review Feedback. This instructional focus aligns with the goal that follows which emphasizes instruction that centers on Student Engagement in order to improve student outcomes in literacy. Our school survey results indicate that students are participating in discussion (94%) and are respectful (81%) and the room for growth comes in citing evidence (69%) and building on the ideas of others (57%) Grant Avenue Elementary’ s Instructional Focus: We use evidence to support arguments in discussion in all content areas, resulting in stronger discussion and writing. This will develop our communication and collaboration skills necessary for college and career readiness. Students will… Make their thinking strong and visible in conversation with peers, in conferences with teachers, and in their writing. Teachers will.. Strategically plan opportunities for this work, balancing teacher talk and student discussion. We will build student capacity through scaffolds such as language frames and clear modeling of how arguments can be strengthened with evidence. Administrators will… Study best practices and support student and adult learning. We will provide actionable feedback and opportunities for collaborative study and planning for refining environmental supports and pedagogical decisions in service of cohesive school-wide practices aligned with our instructional focus. Our QR Area of focus of 1.2 Pedagogy stated that "Across classrooms, teaching practices, aligned to the curricula, reflect an articulated set of beliefs about how students learn best that includes rigorous work products and discussions. However, alignment among beliefs, instructional practices and discussions at the team level is not in place for a vast majority of classrooms. Our action plan addresses this as we strive to build coherence in service of our students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% of our third, fourth, and fifth graders will achieve a level 3 or higher on the ELA State Assessment. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 17  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) As a community we will engage in 3 day cycles of close reading of grade level text each week. All students September - June Administration and Peer Collaborative Teachers As a result of our work with TCRWP Units of Study and Close Reading, at minimum 70% of our K-2 students will meet or exceed grade level reading CCLS benchmarks: Kindergarten – Reading Level D First Grade - Reading Level I Second Grade - Reading Level M Third Grade – Reading Level P Fourth Grade – Reading Level R Fifth Grade – Reading level V Literacy data is collected on a school-wide level on 10/5 and 11/2, 1/11, 3/8, 5/24 and 6/20. All students September- June As a community we will strengthen our practices in planning and preparing for our writing units of study. We can: • Utilize the resources in the units (including online resources) to support our learners • Collaborate to craft teaching points and flesh out the nitty gritty details of lesson planning Administration, Grade Leaders, TCRWP Staff Developers, Lead Teachers : 2018-19 SCEP-FL 18  K-5 We can clearly name priority goals (structure and development) for each writing unit and support students in success in these areas via:  Strategically deciding where/how in unit/day teachers will support students in accessing the priority skills  Engaging students in self-reflection and self-assessment, holding themselves accountable for priority skills  Ensuring charts and planning and scaffolds are centered on priority skills Professional development takes place during weekly common planning periods, full day Professional Development Seminars such as on Election Day, and via coaching sessions with staff developers and lead teachers. All teams are engaged in administering baseline assessments for each unit, analyzing results of these assessments, designing targeted units of study based on analysis of student need, and administering final performance tasks/published pieces to measure growth and establish any strategy groups which may require follow up pertaining to the priority goals. Each and every week, our grade teams meet to plan lessons and units of study. The teams work together to revise and improve upon monthly curriculum maps, crafting individual lessons, and sharing resources and best practices to use in our classrooms. Our teachers also attend Calendar Days, intensive professional development seminars at Columbia University as well as professional development offered through District 9 and the Borough Field Support Center. Teachers share information and resources from these seminars during grade and faculty meetings We conduct five complete cycles of professional development with our Teachers College Reading and Writing Project Staff Developers. Our TC assessments are used to craft explicit teaching points for lessons and used to form guided reading and strategy groups. The data is also used to ensure that our readers are matched to appropriate texts based on their individual reading level. Coaches also support our teachers, one-on-one. Each of our teachers is at different levels of mastery of the TC curriculum, and these one-on-one sessions enable us to differentiate our professional development for our teachers. For the past four years, we have 3 Peer Collaborative teachers, who are coaching our teachers, developing their instructional practices. As PCTs, half of their day is spent developing a targeted group of staff members and their classroom also serves as an ongoing model classroom. Our assistant principal and the principal participate in the labsites and have a dedicated time to meet with staff developers and our lead teachers. This allows us to communicate about how our team is progressing and gives us opportunities to plan for future sessions. Furthermore, Classroom Teachers Sept-June Administration, Staff Developers, Teachers 2018-19 SCEP-FL 19  having administration participate in this professional developments sends the message to our team that we are all learners and enables us to continue the work throughout the year. Formal and informal observations are conducted on an ongoing basis and feedback and support are provided to teachers. Writing Continues to be our lowest modality. Our ENL teachers and Dual Language Teachers will be focusing on: IMPORTANT PRIORITY SKILLS FOR SUPPORTING OUR ELLS – ACROSS ALL CLASSES AND SPECIALTY PROGRAMS: The main areas of focus are: Grant Avenue ELLs in grades 2-5 November-January ENL teachers, Dual Language Teachers 1) Moving from simple sentences to expanded or complex sentences I like basketball. → I like basketball because dribbling the ball is fun. Cats eat meat. Cats do not eat carrots. → Cats eat meat, but cats do not eat carrots. I eat lunch. I read a book. → I read a book while I eat lunch. -or- While I eat lunch, I read a book. 2) Vocabulary Using content specific words (vocabulary from lesson or unit) or higher level describing words Vocabulary can be words or phrases like “razor sharp” Avoid “it, that one, the ones, thing” or other words that do not clearly explain the topic (students often respond with words like “it” when speaking. That habit transfers to writing. Remind your students to name the “it”) 3) Transitions Between sentences (also, another, furthermore, additionally) To introduce or conclude a topic (adding a sentence on each page or in each paragraph Example : Flipping/restating a question 2018-19 SCEP-FL 20 Parents Sept-June Universal Literacy Coach There are many different parts of a frog. (to introduce a page or paragraph about parts of a frog) Our ENL team will be providing professional development for the team at large pertaining to these areas of focus. Our Universal Literacy Coach's goal is to serve as a bridge between parents and teachers in terms of helping our youngest scholars become successful readers. This will be accomplished by offering workshops that invite parents into the school for reading strategies that can practiced at home, as well as offering resources that families can use practically. She will host a Literacy Night for working families that highlights literacy in the real world- from reading recipes to shopping fliers and other environmental print- with the support from staff and administration at Grant. She will continue to find and make available literacy resources and funding to make books accessible and enjoyable for staff and students alike. She is also spear-heading our launch of myon, an online reading resource in our community. She has conducted demonstration lessons in classrooms, provided students, families, and teachers with passwords. We will continue to monitor usage for individual students and classes and build excitement and provide support for classes as we roll out this initiative. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Information pertaining to our literacy/rigorous instruction goal is shared with our families in several ways. Families are invited to participate in Family Fridays each week where they can see their children engaged in literacy practices with their teacher in the classroom setting. Teachers invite families to participate in publishing parties. Back to School Night and Parent Teacher Conferences were ideal structures for shared dialogue between families and teachers on how to support their students in reading. Tools and resources are shared at Back to School Night, Parent Teacher Conferences, and via a series of family workshops. We also will participate in District 9 literacy events led by our Superintendent, Leticia Rosario. At events, families attend workshops planned to support families in helping their children to progress as readers and writers. Our SLT plans to visit classrooms for a learning walk to see practices aligned with our CEP goals in action. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 21  These initiatives will be led by our Classroom Teachers, Parent Coordinator, Universal Literacy Coach, and Administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Resources: TC Professional Development (Title I - Improved Teacher Quality) Substitutes for Calendar Days (School Support Supplement Absence Coverage Per Diem) Classroom Library Books (Title I OTPS and Title I Priority and Focus SIF) Common Planning sessions built into the schedule (Reflected in staffing decisions - table of organization - and scheduling) CCLS and Pilot implementation per session funding, Title III program funding, Data Specialist funds, funding for Lead Teachers to build capacity, Title III program funds to support reading, writing, listening, speaking skills of our ELLs, Title I 1003a Summer to support students in meeting grade level benchmarks Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) X X Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our midpoint analysis benchmark is January 11, 2019. The impact of this work is measured via monitoring progressions in independent reading levels Running records are administered on an ongoing basis and Reading Levels are collected and analyzed in October, November, January, March, May and June. In order to meet our June benchmarks, by January, at minimum, 70% of our students will meet or exceed grade level reading CCLS benchmarks as indicated below: Kindergarten A/B with book introduction First Grade - Reading Level F Second Grade - Reading Level K Third Grade – Reading Level N Fourth Grade – Reading Level Q Fifth Grade – Reading level T 2018-19 SCEP-FL 22  Grade teams continue to meet and teachers analyze reading data for their classes. Teachers are all using data to create small group schedules and supports as we strive to support more of our students in meeting grade-level standards. They look for patterns and trends in the data, identifying areas of strength and challenges. They study the characteristics of the reading levels specific to students in their classes and sort data by subgroups, identifying students with IEPs, students who are English Language Learners. They look for patterns and trends specific to these subgroups and establish modifications specific to meeting the needs of these students. Grade teams collectively establish next steps for instructional planning specific to needs of students in their grade. In response to the data above we hope to create a supplementary after school program to support students in grades 3-5 in meeting grade level standards. Data will be analyzed and shared with our entire faculty, with individual teachers via midyear conversations and with our families via a Goals Newsletter and SLT. Close Reading will also be a focal area for observation and feedback for Advance. As of January 2019, we are on track to achieving this goal by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. TCRWP Running Records Assessments and Advance Observations of ELA Instruction. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 23  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. x 0 x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? This goal was established because it is the center of our mission and vision and our belief in the importance of the school environment as the context for learning. This goal also connects to the elements of strong family and community ties and trust. From its inception, our school motto is SAFETY + TRUST + STRENGTHS = SUCCESS. Grant Avenue Elementary preserves the safety of our students, in body, mind and spirit. Our students develop meaningful relationships with educators and each other. Through these relationships, trust is established. Our students know that they have strengths and talents. These strengths are explored and identified in working with peers and educators. We celebrate strengths and find ways to grow them into other areas. Areas of need will be addressed through, small group support, and targeted instruction .None of this work can take place without strong student attendance. For the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 school year, we fell short of our goal of a minimum of 95% student attendance. Our SLT has elected to shift our strategic work in this realm and to instead focus on our large population of chronically absent students. There is a direct correlation between student attendance and student academic performance; our SLT has elected to build on our work in this area as we improve our instructional strategies, increase parental involvement in this area, and continue to attract and retain Highly Qualified Teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 24  In 2017-2018 school year we had 174 students with 12+ absences. Chronic absenteeism is defined as missing at least 10% (15 days) of school. Last year we had 132 students missing 15+ absences. Last year we had 35 students with 30+ absences. Last year we had 14 students with 40+ absences. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will reduce chronic absenteeism by 10%. Attendance is measurable via ATS. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 25 Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Educators and Students September- June Dean of School Culture, Administration and Attendance Team Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  During our August PD Retreat, Administration and our school Dean led PD for our team on instructional strategies that teachers can use to ensure that classroom communities are welcoming from the moment that students enter the classroom each morning. We also shared best practices for family outreach as a two- way dialogue with families to collaboratively troubleshoot underlying factors that contribute to absences and lateness. The Dean is continuing to support teachers with key instructional strategies via the PD minicourse she leads and through one on one support for teachers. An Attendance Committee was formulated in September of 2018. The Attendance Committee will meet once a week to review attendance data, attendance focus groups (past students designated as chronically absent), discuss progress and conversations with families, brainstorm strategies and incentives for improved attendance and analyze data via our attendance inquiry cycle. Each member of the Attendance Committee will be assigned a group of targeted students to check in with each morning. Each student will have a sticker chart that they will use to mark their presence in school each day. Students who are not present will be marked absent on that chart by the committee member that day and receive a phone call home. All contact with student and/ or their families, including attempted contacts, will be recorded in a binder that each member will receive in September. Students who have been absent for three 2018-19 SCEP-FL 26  consecutive days will be referred to the attendance teacher for follow up visit to their home. Attendance Inquiry Cycles There will be 5 Attendance Inquiry Cycles conducted from September 2018 through June 2019. The Inquiry cycles will focus on kindergarten through fifth grade chronically absent students based on data gathered from ATS. Students selected for the focus group will have had a prior history with chronic absenteeism in the past year. Students in this focus group that will be assigned to an Attendance Committee member. Inquiry Cycle discussions will focus on present attendance of focus students, outreach outcomes with families, check in data with students, and next steps for continued progress. It is the expectation that there will be a substantial reduction in chronic absences of these targeted students with the added supports given from the Attendance Committee members. Review of Attendance Inquiry Data Attendance Inquiry Cycle data will be reviewed at the end of each cycle. Attendance Committee members will be furnished with a copy of the data to review. The data will be divided by grade and each Attendance Committee member will be responsible for the data acquired about their grade level. Attendance Incentives and Motivators The following systems will be in place, and will be monitored and refined as needed to improve overall attendance: Weekly reports to Attendance Committee, classroom teachers, and administration for all students with below 85% attendance. Monthly perfect attendance ceremonies which include certificates and rewards Bi-Monthly “most improved attendance” certificates given to families and students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 27  Monthly letters to each family detailing individual student absences, lateness, and attendance percentage to date Daily posting of school percentage for staff Attendance bulletin board with important information for families and staff and space to celebrate students with exemplary attendance. Person to Person phone calls and attendance meeting outreach for students with below 85% attendance School Messenger phone blasts for all students for return to school dates over long weekends and vacations Weekly Attendance Committee Meetings Attendance Inquiry Cycles established with students with below 85% attendance Home visits by attendance teacher for focus group families Bi-Monthly workshops for focus group and individual action plans established for these families Individual incentives and awards for exemplary student attendance Identify Target to evaluate the progress, effectiveness, and impact of each strategy/ activity Administrators, Attendance Committee and teachers receive weekly reports for all students with below 85% attendance. On a 4-6 week basis, a focus group is identified and the Attendance Committee conducts outreach to this target group. Families are invited in for meetings with the members of the Attendance Committee and action plans are created to support the family in meeting attendance benchmarks. Focus group attendance is monitored by Attendance Committee and Administration. For exemplary gains, families will be awarded “Most Improved” certificates and recognized at PTA meetings. For those whose attendance does not improve, home visits are arranged with attendance teacher and additional action plans are generated. Timeline for implementation and completion including start and end dates September 15th Attendance Inquiry Target Group 1 Established 2018-19 SCEP-FL 28  October 27th Attendance Inquiry Cycle 1 ends- Review and evaluation meeting with Administration and Attendance Committee November 10th Attendance Inquiry Target Group 2 Established December 15th Attendance Inquiry Cycle 2 ends- Review and evaluation meeting with Administration and Attendance Committee December 22nd Attendance Inquiry Target Group 3 Established February 9th Attendance Inquiry Cycle 3 ends- Review and evaluation meeting with Administration and Attendance Committee February 16th Attendance Inquiry Target Group 4 Established April 6th Attendance Inquiry Cycle 4 ends- Review and evaluation meeting with Administration and Attendance Committee April 20th Attendance Inquiry Target Group 5 Established June 15th Attendance Inquiry Cycle 5 ends- Review and evaluation meeting with Administration and Attendance Committee – Goal setting for 2019-2020 Many of the instructional practices are created with the goal of increasing communication between home and school and having a positive impact on parental involvement in this area: Monthly perfect attendance ceremony which include a certificate and reward Monthly “most improved attendance” certificates given to families and student Monthly letters to each family detailing individual student absences, lateness, and attendance percentage to date Attendance bulletin board with important information for families and staff and space to celebrate students with exemplary attendance. Parents/Guardians and Family Members September - June Dean of School Culture 2018-19 SCEP-FL 29  Person to Person phone calls and attendance meeting outreach for students with below 85% attendance Home visits by attendance teacher for target group families Bi-Monthly workshops for target group and individual action plans established for these families Individual incentives and awards for exemplary student attendance 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Many of the instructional practices are created with the goal of increasing communication between home and school and having a positive impact on parental involvement in this area: Monthly perfect attendance ceremony which include a certificate and reward Monthly “most improved attendance” certificates given to families and student Monthly letters to each family detailing individual student absences, lateness, and attendance percentage to date Attendance bulletin board with important information for families and staff and space to celebrate students with exemplary attendance. Person to Person phone calls and attendance meeting outreach for students with below 85% attendance Home visits by attendance teacher for target group families 2018-19 SCEP-FL 30  Bi-Monthly workshops for target group and individual action plans established for these families Individual incentives and awards for exemplary student attendance Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP: Training rate for retreat, supplies for attendance incentives. Title I parent involvement funds for family attendance workshops and family incentives, TL Fair Student Funding for staffing of Dean of School Culture, Guidance Counselor. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will collect attendance daily and our attendance team will engage in 5 cycles of inquiry in support of our target students. Our midyear assessment will be on February 8th. To meet our goal we will need to see a 10% or more reduction in chronically absent students by February 8th. In 2017-2018 we had 132 chronically absent students, 29% of our student population. Therefore the goal is to have less than 19% of our population chronically absent in 2018-2019. We have 456 students currently enrolled. Our target is to have less than 86 students chronically absent. As of 2/28, we have 50 students with 12 absences to date who are at high risk of chronic absenteeism. We have 23 students in the range of of 5-11 absences who are at risk of chronic absenteeism. The attendance team will be focused on supporting all students in the high risk and at risk categories. When we successfully support the at risk group, we are on target to meeting our goal by June 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS reports, YTD attendance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 31  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 32  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. SOP(s) Addressed x x x 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 0 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. We have a diverse team that includes first year teachers and veteran staff. In order to best impact student learning via professional development our SLT has opted to create a structure and system for teacher collaboration. Teacher leaders will facilitate specific mini-courses based on their content area of expertise. All staff members will participate in 2 mini-lesson courses based on their area of need. We know that we are demonstrating growth in ELA and Mathematics proficiency as measured by significant progress on the New York State Exams. We also know that in order to accelerate student learning, we need to build teacher capacity in foundational areas that contribute to student success. Based on our Quality Review, School Quality Guide, and NYC School Survey, we are centering our collaborative professional development on: Rolling out TCRWPs new Phonics program across our Primary Classrooms, Close Reading, Backwards Design (McTigue and Wiggins) Approach to Mathematics Planning, and Classroom Management. Part 2 – Annual Goal 2018-19 SCEP-FL 33  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will have planned and implemented 14 weeks of staff-led mini-courses aligned with priority areas of staff development in service of accelerating student outcomes and teacher practice as evidenced by PD calendar and time sheets. Mini-courses will be facilitated by teacher leaders and all participants will contribute their strengths and ideas to improve pedagogical practices across the community. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 34 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Teachers Sept to June Administration and Grade Leaders Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school year will launch with a 8 part mini-course series that consists of 3 days of 50 minute immersion in their topic and lesson planning related to their topic. Each mini-course will be a vertical team, consisting of team members that span multiple grades. The 4th day of the cycle will be a 70 minute session where grade teams convene to share what they have been learning in their vertical mini-courses with colleagues on their grade. the 5th-7th Mondays will again return to vertical team immersion and planning and the 8th day will be a final session to turnkey content to teams. This structure will grow vertical and horizontal cohesion across our school. We will also end the year with a 6 part mini-course series. The first mini-course day is designed as a reunion from the mini-course that launched the year. Mini-course teams will reflect on the impact of their initial learning and collaboration on their practices and student learning throughout the year. The following 4 Monday sessions will be allocated to continuing in the original area of study, taking into account new priorities for 2019-2020 or teachers may elect to engage in a different topic to prepare for 2019-2020 based on each professional's area of focus for future development. All of our mini courses are designed to insure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. Teacher leaders will support teachers in designing and implementing CCLS based instruction that leads to multiple entry points for all students. Through this mini course structure, our teachers are collaborating to create an academic and social-emotional learning environment that 2018-19 SCEP-FL 35  is responsive to student experiences and tailored to student strengths and needs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We work to engage families in this goal via structures that have been mentioned throughout this CEP. Information pertaining to supporting students academically is shared between teachers and parents via Curriculum Conferences, Parent Teacher Conferences, Family Fridays, Workshops, and one to one meetings with teachers. Each mini-course will dedicate a Tuesday Parent Engagement Session to a workshop related to their mini-course topic to help turnkey the content to our families in support of their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP and Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement funds for curricular materials, FSF for salaries of Peer Collaborative and Model Teachers, FSF for per session for teachers to support after school study groups, Title I 1003a for summer school to support students in meeting grade level benchmarks Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our midpoint analysis benchmark is February 8, 2019. At this point, to be on track to meeting our goal all teams will need to have engaged in at least 8 of our mini-course sessions. We will assess the impact of this team collaboration via our Midyear Survey which is due in January and also at our Grade Leaders meeting mid-February 2019. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 36  We successfully conducted 8 mini-course sessions in September, October, and November. The following are teacher comments on the impact of this work: I have a better grasp of Engage modules and have built in more opportunities for concrete engagement with the math before moving to abstract work. This mini course allowed me to put more time and focus into prioritizing lessons and content. As a result, students are better equipped to master priority skills and standards. This mini course emphasized the importance of looking at assessments prior to planning and teaching. I am now using exit tickets and problem sets in a more strategic way to guide instruction. I've learned about the purpose and structure of close reading. We were able to vertically hash out the structure of this work and make decisions about the texts. I've gained confidence in helping the whole class read grade-level texts through different lenses. I now see my students transferring their knowledge of close reading to other subjects. For example, students are now annotating in reading and in mathematics. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Professional Development Calendar, Advance Observations aligned with mini course topics, ELA and Mathematics assessments, OORS data aligned with mini course topics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 37  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). X x x x SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Over the past 9 years, our SLT has opted to measure our effective school leadership based on the School Survey. 2018 School Survey data demonstrated that: 100% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff his or her expectations for meeting instructional goals. 100% of teachers say that the principal communicates a clear vision for this school. 100% of teacher say that the principal sets high standards for student learning. 100% of teachers say that the principal carefully tracks student academic progress. Additionally, we were rated Well Developed in QR indicators 1.3 and 3.1, and Proficient in 3.4 and 5.1. All of these indicators closely align with school leadership. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 38  As a result, our SLT is opting to take this Goal in a new direction, moving from the metric of the School Survey to Mathematics Assessment Results. Our SLT believes that effective leaders create and implement strong professional development that builds teacher capacity and results in increased student achievement. We are demonstrating growth in student achievement in mathematics and we strive to continue to increase proficiency. In 2016, 12% of our students were proficient on the State Mathematics Exam. In 2017, 31% of our students were proficient, and we continue to see gains in 2018 with 34% now achieving a 3 or a 4 on the exam. We attribute gains to a few factors, we moved to EngageNY Modules as our curriculum at the end of 2016. We doubled our math periods and added daily number talks in K and 1 and 3 weekly lessons centered on NYCTM's 5 Practices for Orchestrating Productive Mathematical Discussions (Margaret S. Smith and Mary Kay Stein) in grades 2-5. Our priority need for continuing growth is to refine our planning practices based on McTigue and Wiggins Backwards Design. This will enable our teachers to grow their content knowledge in understanding what students need to be able to know and demonstrate at the end of each lesson/module and then plan with the end in mind, modifying units and lessons to set students up for success and mastery. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 40% of our students will demonstrate proficiency on the Math State Assessment; student achievement will be accelerated by collaboratively planning mathematics instruction using a backwards design methodology. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 39 Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students and Staff Sept to June Administration, Peer Collaborative Teacher, Math Leaders, Teachers, Students Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). We will create and implement a Professional Development plan that builds teacher capacity in collaboratively planning mathematics instruction using a backwards design methodology. During June planning days in 2018, our Peer Collaborative Teacher led each team through a protocol of using the mid and end of module assessments to plan each unit. Teams started by taking the mid and end of module assessments for the first module in September. Teams then identified the skills and standards at the center of the module, discussing what students must know and be able to do to be successful in this module. During our staff retreat in August, our Peer Collaborative Teacher will build on this work by replicating the process for planning for individual lessons. Teams will identify what the student independent work task(s) will be and use that work to then drive teacher modelling/instruction. The Peer Collaborative Teacher will be leading an 8 week mini course to launch the school year entitled "Planning/Modifying Engage Units and Lessons using Backwards Design." A math leader from each team across the school will be enrolled in the mini-course. These math leaders, in turn will lead their respective teams in planning Math units and lessons using these protocols for the remainder of the year. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 40  Following this mini course, math team leaders will turnkey practices from the vertical team to their own team. Administration and Peer Collaborative Teachers will support math team leaders in restructuring team weekly planning time to align with the Backwards Design Methodology. Administration will observe team meetings and classroom instruction through the lens of: "What will students be expected to know and do in this lesson/unit and how are plans and implementation structured so as to set students up for success?" 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Information pertaining to supporting students in mathematics is shared between teachers and parents via Curriculum Conferences, Parent Teacher Conferences, Family Fridays, Workshops, and one to one meetings with teachers on Tuesday Family Engagement Time. Teachers will also be using Kinvolved texting service to share links with families to help parents and guardians to know more about the content and algorithms that are being taught in school since there have been significant shifts in mathematics instruction since many of our families were in school. The goal is to connect home and school in support of our mathematicians. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP funding for absence coverage for professional development and for per session meetings after school. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding 2018-19 SCEP-FL 41  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will administer a midyear mathematics simulation and compare it to the baseline assessment and analyze results. We will use data to revise and adjust our action plan, as needed. We will collect all data and analysis by 2/8/2019. The Math Simulation will take place on 3/5 and 3/6. Data will be used to revise and adjust curriculum/instructional groupings from March to June. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 3-5 Mathematics Test Simulation Results, Advance Mathematics Observations, Module Assessment Data PK-5. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 42  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. X x X o SOP(s) Addressed Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Our school has many strengths relative to the Strong Family and Community Ties Element: Per the 2017-2018 School Survey: 97% of families feel that the principal works to create a sense of community in the school. (Q3b) 96% of families say that the principal at their school promotes family and community involvement in the school. (Q3c) 94% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. (Q1a) 95% of families say that they get opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q1b) 95% of families say that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their school. (Q1e) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 43  96% of families say that their school communicates with them in a language and in a way that they can understand. (Q1h) 100% of teachers say that families are offered opportunities to visit their child's classroom, such as observing instruction or participating in an activity with their child. (Q9a) 97% of teachers say that teachers at this school understand families' problems and concerns. (Q9b) 100% of teachers say that teachers at this school work closely with families to meet students' needs. (Q9c) Per our 2017-2018 Quality Review, we were rated Well Developed in 1.4 and 3.4 which closely align with Strong Family and Community Ties. Our School Leadership Team attributes this strong data to the structures and systems that we have in place as a school community for regular, ongoing interaction with families in informal and formal settings. The SLT crafted this goal in 2017 and has chosen to build on the work of Power Family Fridays for 2018-2019. In 2017-2018 there was a measurable impact in terms of attendance data on family attendance. We are opting to continue this new tradition and intend to improve communication , advertising these events well in advance and using our new Kinvolved app to further increase attendance. The SLT consists of family and community stakeholders who planned the 5 events for the year. The SLT believes that the relationships formed through community events like Power Family Fridays is a foundation for reciprocal conversations with home and school so that students strengths and needs are identified and action plans can be formed. We see Power Family Fridays as a gateway activity to bring families in to our calendar of training/workshops for families to support students success. Attendance has historically been lower in our self-contained special education classes; this will be subgroup of focus for boosting family attendance this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school community will design and implement 5 “Power Family Fridays” which have a school-wide theme to boost attendance and engagement during Family Fridays. Family Attendance at each event will be greater that 125 as measured by sign in sheets. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 44  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Our school community will design 5 “Power Family Fridays” which have a school wide theme to boost attendance and engagement during Family Fridays Teachers and Families September to June Administration  SLT ideas o October – Pumpkin Patch – pumpkin design o November: Hopes and Dreams/College Spirit/Career Dress up day o February: Valentine's Day / Love & appreciation/Black History Month o March: Super heroes (infusing it before testing – March or early April) o May - Core Values Day or Multicultural Day We will identify a teacher and a parent leader for each Power Family Friday who can plan specific activities for the whole school related to the theme. Students and Families Sept to June Teachers, Parent Leaders, Purchasing Secretary, and Admin The goal of Power Family Fridays is to grow traditions, engage more families in coming out to Family Fridays, and to bond as a school community. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Change for Kids City Year Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 45  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Title I SWP for Professional Development Fees and supplies for Power Family Friday activities. Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement funds for parent involvement. We will be supported in this work also by a community partner via City Year or Change for Kids that will be conducting community outreach and supporting with events. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 8th, 2019 we will have hosted at least 2 Power Family Fridays. As of March 1, we have hosted 4 Power Family Fridays. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Calendar and attendance sheets maintained by our Parent Coordinator. SLT feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 46  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Running Records benchmarks. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Varies based on student need. Methods include: Services are provided during the school day. Push-in small group instruction Pull-out small group instruction One-to-One conferences English Language Arts Academic Intervention Services are provided by classroom teachers, cluster teachers and our academic intervention service providers. The types of programs used are: Wilson Early Intervention (Fundations), and components of our TC Reading and Writing Workshop such as Guided Reading. These programs are used during specified 50 minute blocks of instructional time provided by an additional teacher who pushes into the classroom. Students meet in small groups of no more than 6 students. We assess our program’s effectiveness by using Fountas and Pinnell Running Records as well as Teacher’s College Concepts about Print and Letter 2018-19 SCEP-FL 47  Mathematics Go Math Chapter Test performance Science Assessments administered by classroom teachers Social Studies Assessments administered by classroom teachers Recognition Assessments. Mathematics Intervention is provided by our classroom teachers as part of our Math Workshop. We incorporate additional components of the Go Math program to differentiate learning for our students during small group instruction throughout the day. The AIS providers integrate science with reading lessons using science related stories to answer comprehension questions and acquire additional vocabulary. This occurs during scheduled literacy push-in or pull-out periods 1-3 days per week for 20-50 minutes in Guided Reading and Small Strategy Groups The AIS providers integrate social studies with reading lessons using social studies related stories to answer comprehension questions and acquire additional vocabulary. This occurs during scheduled literacy push-in or pull-out periods 1-3 days per Varies based on student need. Methods include: Services are provided during the school day. Push-in small group instruction Pull-out small group instruction One-to-One conferences Varies based on student need. Methods include: Services are provided during the school day. Push-in small group instruction Pull-out small group instruction One-to-One conferences Varies based on student need. Methods include: Services are provided during the school day. Push-in small group instruction Pull-out small group instruction One-to-One conferences 2018-19 SCEP-FL 48 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Referrals from classroom teachers and PPT. Varies based on student need. Methods include: Services are provided during the school day. Push-in small group instruction Pull-out small group instruction One-to-One conferences week for 20-50 minutes in Guided Reading and Small Strategy Groups. The Guidance Counselor provides individual and group counseling for students that need additional support at-risk. The Dean of School Culture also meets with targeted groups of students. The counselor and Dean of School Culture reinforce core values in sessions. Additionally the Counselor and Dean of School Culture reach out to families and students and provides behavioral modifications that can be addressed in school and at home to enhance the learning of all students. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 49  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. ROLE OF STH SCHOOL-BASED LIAISON AND DESCRIPTION OF SERVICES 63 students  Acts as liaison for students living in temporary housing, and is responsible for tracking and providing interventions and support services in accordance with the McKinney Vento Act.  Maintains a folder throughout the school year with ATS reports that include the names of students living in temporary housing situations and lists of services offered as funded by the Title I, Part A mandatory set aside and participates in McKinney-Vento trainings on behalf of the school, each year.  Works with the pupil accounting secretary to identify students in need of services and supports.  Informs school staff (i.e. attendance teachers, pupil accounting secretaries, etc.) on how to respond to a student living in temporary housing and shares resources from trainings held every year.  Collaborates with community stakeholders to advocate for students and families.  Check availability of transportation for students 2018-19 SCEP-FL 50   Educate staff on temporary housing services and supports  Provides workshops for targeted parents/guardians  Supports families/students in temporary housing by offering solutions and connecting them with resources.  Works with the principal to ensure that the STH component of the School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan is completed and implemented with a high degree of quality. Dean of School Culture  Make beginning of the year check ins with the students to assess their needs and lend support as needed.  Provide one-on-one and small group support to students focusing on helpful ways to transition from home to home or to different schools, making friends that last, self-care, and self-efficacy.  Provide clothing, school supplies, and hygiene products on as need basis.  Track attendance data; stressing importance of on time school attendance, reaching out to families to create solid plans for excellent school attendance.  Workshops provided for STH families that focus on transitions, meeting the emotional and academic need of their children, transportation, and attendance supports. Our Dean and Guidance counselor work collaboratively to ensure that our school provides services to Students in Temporary Housing, such as basic emergency supplies (e.g., uniforms, school supplies, books, glasses, etc.) and other educational services (e.g., counseling services, intervention programs) so that STH students have opportunities to progress academically. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 51  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-FL 52  Section 8: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Each spring, we convene our Grant Avenue Hiring Committee. We carefully review all of the resumes that we maintain in our resume file and the credentials of Open Market Transfer candidates. Top candidates are invited for interviews with our committee. At the interview, teachers present their portfolios which are filled with artifacts that speak to who each individual is as an educator. We then ask a series of questions which the committee crafts each year. These questions are consistently used for all candidates and address teacher qualifications and capabilities in the following areas: lesson planning and instructional practices, data driven instruction, collaboration with parents/guardians and colleagues, teaching philosophy and knowledge of our school community, conflict resolution strategies, and professional contributions. Hiring Committee members rate each response to each question and a score is tabulated for each candidate. The candidates with the highest scores are invited back to the school to meet with the committee, often demonstrating a lesson. After all parties determine that the teacher is a great fit for our school community, we offer the position to the teacher. All new hires receive a welcome letter and a professional development survey over the summer. This survey invites teachers to self-identify areas where they need support as well as areas of expertise. Teachers meet one on one with the principal to study the curriculum maps for their grade/program and to review the Employee Handbook. New teachers are welcomed at our annual Educator Retreat in August where new and returning employees gather to continue our work as collaborators and to prepare for the year ahead. We ensure that highly qualified teachers are retained at Grant Avenue Elementary school through strategic planning for appropriate assignments for all teachers and differentiated professional development. Administration evaluates Advance data to determine focal components for individual teachers and uses this data to ensure that teachers are assigned to grades and programs that align with individual strengths and needs. All teachers are supported by grade representatives that meet monthly with administration to plan collegial support. Additionally, we have a robust peer mentoring program including 2 peer collaborative teachers , 2 teachers with release time in their schedule for mentoring, and a Universal Literacy Coach from Central. All of these mentors support individual teachers in 10 week coaching cycles with goals specific to the needs of each teacher and an action plan that is developed with each teacher in collaboration with administration. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2018-19 SCEP-FL 53  Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our teachers participate in rigorous, reflective and differentiated professional development which include ample opportunities for teacher leadership and development. Teachers also receive feedback on their practice from peers and administration. For the past four years we have been selected as a model school by Teachers College Reading and Writing Project and we host literacy specialist interns in our classrooms. These interns are in the process of completing their masters’ degrees through their fieldwork in our school community. Interns often interview for positions in our school. New and returning teachers are supported in a variety of ways. All new teachers are matched to one of our lead teachers as a mentor. Partners meet for weekly meetings that support best practices. New teachers also are mentored by grade leaders and administration. Our teachers also take advantage of learning from their peers, conducting intervisitations over the course of the year to observe best practices taking place in our classrooms. The principal also hosts a “New to Grant Group” on a monthly basis as a forum for attending to the unique needs of teachers who are new to teaching or new to our school community. All of our teachers participate in labsites, one-to-one coaching and full days of professional development connected to our work with Columbia University’s Teachers College. Teachers also participate in BFSC workshops and in-house professional development via grade team meetings, faculty meetings, and conference days. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). Each Winter, our parent coordinator and teachers visit local preschool programs to share information about our school. Then families are invited to our school for Open House tours. Several of the programs bring all of their students to our school for a field trip to give them exposure to what Kindergarten is like. Families are invited for an orientation in May and then again in September to ensure that home and school are connected in supporting the social-emotional and academic needs of transitioning Kindergarten students. In June, registered students are invited to come in and meet some of our teachers and to take part in a preliminary assessment of academic performance. All of our families are invited to a Back to School Celebration Picnic in August, Curriculum Conferences in September and 2018-19 SCEP-FL 54  Family Fridays. All of these structures have been established to help all of our families transition as new members of our school community and ensure that families are welcomed as active partners in education 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers are included in decisions regarding the assessments we use. We convened a committee to decide on the MOSL assessments for the 2013-2014, 2014-2015, 2015-2016, 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school years. Teachers were also invited to meetings to evaluate curriculum choices for the new math program that we have adopted; the quality of the assessments and performance tasks was a critical factor in our decision to move to Engage NY and to expand our mathematical programming Teachers also have the opportunity to provide administration with feedback on our local assessments via grade team meetings, and vertical leadership meetings. Administration participates in weekly inquiry meetings for literacy and Monday common planning sessions for mathematics. Administration provides ongoing professional development through these meetings to ensure that teachers are using assessment data to drive instructional choices. This professional development and planning is assessed via formal and informal observations and feedback is provided to teachers in oral and written form. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal 401,324 16,979 59,977 34,498 13,646 X x x X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d,5e 5a, 5c 5a, 5c 5a, 5c 5a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 55  Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 0 3,046,103 0 X 0 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high- 2018-19 SCEP-FL 56  quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 57  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Parent and Family Engagement Policy Grant Avenue Elementary, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Act (ESEA) is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. We, the administrators, teachers, staff and parents of Grant Avenue Elementary School, fully recognizing our mutual interdependence and responsibility for supporting our students’ educational, social and personal endeavors in order that they may achieve academic success, realize their potential as unique individuals and become responsible, contributing citizens, hereby pledge to each other and to our students to provide that support by voluntarily and eagerly signing the agreements stated in this document which align with our Community Standards and Expectations for All. We, the students of Grant Avenue Elementary School, recognizing our own duty to accept responsibility for achieving academic success, as well as for our social development and personal growth as contributing, respectful members of our family, school and world community, hereby pledge our commitment to fulfilling that responsibility to the best of our ability, by signing the agreements stated below. Grant Avenue Expectations for All 2018-19 SCEP-FL 58  The Grant Avenue Elementary School Community Standards and Student Rights and Responsibilities ensure that every member of our school is provided with extremely clear expectations regarding the acceptable code of conduct at Grant Avenue Elementary School. Both documents will be mailed home to parents over the summer in preparation for the school year ahead. Our staff will review the documents in Summer Training sessions and on the days allocated for Professional Development leading up to the day when Grant Avenue Elementary School opens its doors. Our teachers will prominently post the Community Standards and Student Rights and Responsibilities in their classrooms. They will examine them with their students and design mini-lessons around components. (Ex. Role-playing activities, analysis of what it means to “earn the trust of your peers and staff members,” chart what is necessary to fulfill the responsibility of coming to school “prepared.” Students will investigate the Community Standards and their Rights and Responsibilities in their classrooms, in the context of their Student Handbooks, and the language that is used in these documents will be reinforced throughout the building. The Core Values of our School Community are upheld by all: I make problems smaller, I tell the truth, I stay safe, I am a team member, I make strong choices, I never give up. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Information pertaining to our literacy goal is shared with our families in a variety of manners. Families are invited to participate in Family Fridays each week where they can see their children engaged in literacy practices with their teacher in the classroom setting. Teachers invite families to participate in publishing parties. Curriculum Conferences and Parent Teacher Conferences were ideal structures for shared dialogue between families and teachers on how to support their students in reading. Tools and resources were shared at Curriculum Conferences, Parent Teacher Conferences, and via a series of family workshops. We also will participate in District 9 literacy events led by our Superintendent, Leticia Rosario. At events, families attend workshops planned to support families in helping their children to progress as readers and writers. Our SLT plans to visit classrooms for a learning walk to see practices aligned with our CEP goals in action. Many of the instructional practices are created with the goal of increasing communication between home and school and having a positive impact on parental involvement in this area: Monthly perfect attendance ceremony which include a certificate and reward Monthly “most improved attendance” certificates given to families and student Monthly letters to each family detailing individual student absences, lateness, and attendance percentage to date Attendance bulletin board with important information for families and staff and space to celebrate students with exemplary attendance. Person to Person phone calls and attendance meeting outreach for students with below 85% attendance 2018-19 SCEP-FL 59  Home visits by attendance teacher for target group families Bi-Monthly workshops for target group and individual action plans established for these families Individual incentives and awards for exemplary student attendance We work to engage families in this goal via structures that have been mentioned throughout this CEP. Information pertaining to supporting students in mathematics is shared between teachers and parents via Curriculum Conferences, Parent Teacher Conferences, Family Fridays, Workshops, and one to one meetings with teachers. The following are just a few of the structures and systems that we have in place to ensure that our Parents and Guardians are active team members in establishing a strong and trusting school culture: We also will host our 9th Annual Back to School Meet and Greet picnic, inviting families to meet their child’s teacher, school staff, and other families from the Grant Avenue Community. We send home monthly school calendars with a wide array of events designed to engage families as partners in education. All educators are committed to creating a welcoming school so parents and family members know that they are valued and empowered as learning partners and experts on their children. Our strong home-school connections benefit students when families support and extend the school’s teaching at home. Since our first year, parent involvement has been very important to the success of our students and Grant Avenue as a whole. Over the years, we’ve built upon workshops and events that were successful and added more opportunities and engagement methods to ensure that our families are involved as partners in education which include Family Fridays, bi-weekly parent workshops, and school-wide events and celebrations such as our Arts Performances, Multicultural Festival, and Field Day. Parent workshops are offered on topics such as Dealing with Challenging behaviors, Middle School Preparation, and Homework and Study skills. During each workshop the topic is discussed at length and parents/ family members are given an opportunity to comment and ask questions that are more pertinent to their personal situations. Quarterly school community assemblies are held, which families are invited to, to recognize student progress, remind students of school cultural expectations, and discuss school cultural goals. Family Fridays is a specific structure is a cornerstone to our work in engaging families as it is a strategic weekly method for connecting home and school in support of each child. The intended outcome of this practice is to give families ample and frequent opportunities to formally and informally engage in their child’s learning. On a weekly basis, families participate in class activities, learn strategies to help their child in the home, meet other families, and interact with teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 60  One teacher shared that she notices a huge difference in parent involvement. Those who come to Family Fridays and have face to face time with the teacher do more homework. It delivers accountability as well as partnership.” Our parent coordinator also celebrates family participation with incentives such as a Parent Participation Honor Roll, periodic raffles, and a breakfast honoring active parents in our school community. Parental Involvement and School Quality Information pertaining to our literacy goal is shared with our families in a variety of manners. Families are invited to participate in Family Fridays each week where they can see their children engaged in literacy practices with their teacher in the classroom setting. Teachers invite families to participate in publishing parties. Curriculum Conferences and Parent Teacher Conferences were ideal structures for shared dialogue between families and teachers on how to support their students in reading. Tools and resources were shared at Curriculum Conferences, Parent Teacher Conferences, and via a series of family workshops. We also will participate in District 9 literacy events led by our Superintendent, Leticia Rosario. At events, families attend workshops planned to support families in helping their children to progress as readers and writers. Our SLT plans to visit classrooms for a learning walk to see practices aligned with our CEP goals in action. Many of the instructional practices are created with the goal of increasing communication between home and school and having a positive impact on parental involvement in this area: Monthly perfect attendance ceremony which include a certificate and reward Monthly “most improved attendance” certificates given to families and student Monthly letters to each family detailing individual student absences, lateness, and attendance percentage to date Attendance bulletin board with important information for families and staff and space to celebrate students with exemplary attendance. Person to Person phone calls and attendance meeting outreach for students with below 85% attendance Home visits by attendance teacher for target group families Bi-Monthly workshops for target group and individual action plans established for these families 2018-19 SCEP-FL 61  Individual incentives and awards for exemplary student attendance We work to engage families in this goal via structures that have been mentioned throughout this CEP. Information pertaining to supporting students in mathematics is shared between teachers and parents via Curriculum Conferences, Parent Teacher Conferences, Family Fridays, Workshops, and one to one meetings with teachers. The following are just a few of the structures and systems that we have in place to ensure that our Parents and Guardians are active team members in establishing a strong and trusting school culture: We also will host our 9th Annual Back to School Meet and Greet picnic, inviting families to meet their child’s teacher, school staff, and other families from the Grant Avenue Community. We send home monthly school calendars with a wide array of events designed to engage families as partners in education. All educators are committed to creating a welcoming school so parents and family members know that they are valued and empowered as learning partners and experts on their children. Our strong home-school connections benefit students when families support and extend the school’s teaching at home. Since our first year, parent involvement has been very important to the success of our students and Grant Avenue as a whole. Over the years, we’ve built upon workshops and events that were successful and added more opportunities and engagement methods to ensure that our families are involved as partners in education which include Family Fridays, bi-weekly parent workshops, and school-wide events and celebrations such as our Arts Performances, Multicultural Festival, and Field Day. Parent workshops are offered on topics such as Dealing with Challenging behaviors, Middle School Preparation, and Homework and Study skills. During each workshop the topic is discussed at length and parents/ family members are given an opportunity to comment and ask questions that are more pertinent to their personal situations. Quarterly school community assemblies are held, which families are invited to, to recognize student progress, remind students of school cultural expectations, and discuss school cultural goals. Family Fridays is a specific structure is a cornerstone to our work in engaging families as it is a strategic weekly method for connecting home and school in support of each child. The intended outcome of this practice is to give families ample and frequent opportunities to formally and informally engage in their child’s learning. On a weekly basis, families participate in class activities, learn strategies to help their child in the home, meet other families, and interact with teachers. One teacher shared that she notices a huge difference in parent involvement. Those who come to Family Fridays and have face to face time with the teacher do more homework. It delivers accountability as well as partnership.” Our parent coordinator also celebrates family participation with incentives such as a Parent Participation Honor Roll, periodic raffles, and a breakfast honoring active parents in our school community. Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement Information pertaining to our literacy goal is shared with our families in a variety of manners. Families are invited to participate in Family Fridays each week where they can see their children engaged in literacy practices with their teacher in the classroom setting. Teachers invite families to participate in publishing parties. Curriculum Conferences and Parent Teacher Conferences were ideal structures for shared dialogue between families and teachers on how to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 62  support their students in reading. Tools and resources were shared at Curriculum Conferences, Parent Teacher Conferences, and via a series of family workshops. We also will participate in District 9 literacy events led by our Superintendent, Leticia Rosario. At events, families attend workshops planned to support families in helping their children to progress as readers and writers. Our SLT plans to visit classrooms for a learning walk to see practices aligned with our CEP goals in action. Many of the instructional practices are created with the goal of increasing communication between home and school and having a positive impact on parental involvement in this area: Monthly perfect attendance ceremony which include a certificate and reward Monthly “most improved attendance” certificates given to families and student Monthly letters to each family detailing individual student absences, lateness, and attendance percentage to date Attendance bulletin board with important information for families and staff and space to celebrate students with exemplary attendance. Person to Person phone calls and attendance meeting outreach for students with below 85% attendance Home visits by attendance teacher for target group families Bi-Monthly workshops for target group and individual action plans established for these families Individual incentives and awards for exemplary student attendance We work to engage families in this goal via structures that have been mentioned throughout this CEP. Information pertaining to supporting students in mathematics is shared between teachers and parents via Curriculum Conferences, Parent Teacher Conferences, Family Fridays, Workshops, and one to one meetings with teachers. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 63  The following are just a few of the structures and systems that we have in place to ensure that our Parents and Guardians are active team members in establishing a strong and trusting school culture: We also will host our 9th Annual Back to School Meet and Greet picnic, inviting families to meet their child’s teacher, school staff, and other families from the Grant Avenue Community. We send home monthly school calendars with a wide array of events designed to engage families as partners in education. All educators are committed to creating a welcoming school so parents and family members know that they are valued and empowered as learning partners and experts on their children. Our strong home-school connections benefit students when families support and extend the school’s teaching at home. Since our first year, parent involvement has been very important to the success of our students and Grant Avenue as a whole. Over the years, we’ve built upon workshops and events that were successful and added more opportunities and engagement methods to ensure that our families are involved as partners in education which include Family Fridays, bi-weekly parent workshops, and school-wide events and celebrations such as our Arts Performances, Multicultural Festival, and Field Day. Parent workshops are offered on topics such as Dealing with Challenging behaviors, Middle School Preparation, and Homework and Study skills. During each workshop the topic is discussed at length and parents/ family members are given an opportunity to comment and ask questions that are more pertinent to their personal situations. Quarterly school community assemblies are held, which families are invited to, to recognize student progress, remind students of school cultural expectations, and discuss school cultural goals. Family Fridays is a specific structure is a cornerstone to our work in engaging families as it is a strategic weekly method for connecting home and school in support of each child. The intended outcome of this practice is to give families ample and frequent opportunities to formally and informally engage in their child’s learning. On a weekly basis, families participate in class activities, learn strategies to help their child in the home, meet other families, and interact with teachers. One teacher shared that she notices a huge difference in parent involvement. Those who come to Family Fridays and have face to face time with the teacher do more homework. It delivers accountability as well as partnership.” Our parent coordinator also celebrates family participation with incentives such as a Parent Participation Honor Roll, periodic raffles, and a breakfast honoring active parents in our school community. I. School Responsibilities School-Parent Compact (SPC) Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 64  ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); ● providing a safe and clean environment and an atmosphere conducive to teaching and learning, for the entire school community; ● providing teachers and staff with the materials, supplies, and support necessary for them to fulfill their obligations to the students and one another; ● clearly communicating performance expectations to the teachers and provide them with constructive feedback; ● providing teachers and staff with meaningful opportunities for professional growth and enrichment. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; ● clearly communicating expectations for student performance to the parents and providing them with student profiles and assessment results; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 65  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 66  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Grant Avenue Expectations for All The Grant Avenue Elementary School Community Standards and Student Rights and Responsibilities ensure that every member of our school is provided with extremely clear expectations regarding the acceptable code of conduct at Grant Avenue Elementary School. Both documents will be mailed home to parents over the summer in preparation for the school year ahead. Our staff will review the documents in Summer Training sessions and on the days allocated for Professional Development leading up to the day when Grant Avenue Elementary School opens its doors. Our teachers will prominently post the Community Standards and Student Rights and Responsibilities in their classrooms. They will examine them with their students and design mini-lessons around components. (Ex. Role-playing activities, analysis of what it means to “earn the trust of your peers and staff members,” chart what is necessary to fulfill the responsibility of coming to school “prepared.” Students will investigate the Community Standards and their Rights and Responsibilities in their classrooms, in the context of their Student Handbooks, and the language that is used in these documents will be reinforced throughout the building. Grant Avenue Elementary School Rights and Responsibilities ● Right to a safe learning environment 2018-19 SCEP-FL 67  ● Right to give and receive respect from all members of the community ● Right to identify and build on your strengths ● Right to express your opinions and ideas respectfully ● Right to know how you are doing in your classes through conferences, progress reports, and report cards ● Right to receive guidance, counseling, and advice for personal, social, and educational development from staff members and community advisors ● ● Preserve the safety and earn the trust of your peers and staff members Responsibilities ● Be accountable for your actions ● Arrive at school, on time, daily ● Work to the best of your ability during each lesson of each day ● Acknowledge and celebrate the strengths of others ● Come to school prepared I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); ● providing a safe and clean environment and an atmosphere conducive to teaching and learning, for the entire school community; ● providing teachers and staff with the materials, supplies, and support necessary for them to fulfill their obligations to the students and one another; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 68  ● clearly communicating performance expectations to the teachers and provide them with constructive feedback; ● providing teachers and staff with meaningful opportunities for professional growth and enrichment. I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; ● clearly communicating expectations for student performance to the parents and providing them with student profiles and assessment results; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 2018-19 SCEP-FL 69  Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 2018-19 SCEP-FL 70  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 71  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 2018-19 SCEP-FL 72  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Overview: Grant Avenue Elementary School serves 106 English Language Learners (ELLs), which is 23.5% of our total population of students. In order to build language capacity for our ELL/MLL population we will offer an afterschool program open to all students in grades 2-5 who received Entering, Emerging or Transitioning proficiency on the NYSESLAT within the past two years. We hope our students grow in all areas, speaking, listening reading and writing as well as foundational language skills. To help our students grow we strive to create a fun unique learning experience when creating our Title III program through the incorporation of learning games and plays. Our after school program will incorporate: professional development for afterschool staff, literacy instruction through the use of readers theater and connecting non fiction texts, educational games, writing activities as well as family engagement opportunities. Students will read plays and non-fiction texts to create alternate endings to their play. Students will perform their play for family and friends to showcase the work they have done and sharing resources from the program with their families to continue work at home. Rationale: Our Title III program looks at student data generated from EDAT, proficiency levels, testing data and running records to guide instruction. Based on data gathered from the EDAT tool, we are targeting students in grades 2-5 to improve English proficiency before they reach long-term ELL status. Following the trend that our students perform lowset in the writing modality, written activities addressing different genres will be incorporated daily into the afterschool program. Knowing that we strive for our students to have balanced language skills, our writing component will be in response to visuals, and texts to build reading capacity. Students will plan using graphic organizers as well as oral rehearsal to build speaking skills. Using peer feedback students will have opportunities to engage in active listening practice. By targeting instruction using all modalities with a focus on strengthening writing skills we aim to push students English proficiency and improve NYSESLAT scores moving our highest needs students. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: Title III is open to all students in grades 2-5 who received Entering, Emerging or Transitioning proficiency on the NYSESLAT within the past two years. These students are from both general and special education classes. This grade band will encompass Middle Year ELLs, Approaching Middle Year ELLs, Newcomers, and Approaching Long Term ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 73  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Focus Skills: Writing based on texts and photographs - using academic language, use of a variety of transitions and conjunctions, creating on topic responses to a given prompt, basic sentence structure, use of sentence frames, word banks and graphic organizers to guide writing, citing evidence Fluency in Reading - Reader’s Theater Listening and Speaking skills through collaborative work Learning outcome: using productive language to present learned material. There will an oral presentation via Reader’s Theater play and a presentation of written works produced during the program. The bulk of the program is devoted to mini-lessons with collaborative work time, students will have the opportunity to learn with peers in both heterogeneous and homogeneous groups. For heterogeneous working periods students group will work on a play that is tied to a content subject area they will study. During homogeneous working periods students will generate writing from photographs. There will be different types of grouping during the program:The students will have opportunities for both homogeneous and heterogeneous grouping to focus on specific skills at students levels and encourage peer collaboration, tutoring and growth. Students will work in groups of 16 with two co-teachers to keep a low teacher student ratio.Students will be placed in heterogeneous groups to learn from and with each other in order to read and write in preparation for a performance of a play.We will us homogeneous grouping for our writing skill building sessions. These groups are determined by ELL proficiency levels, Guided Reading Levels and IEP needs. This group will work on targeting specific writing skills to build English language skills using peer and teacher feedback. Schedule and Duration: Our Title III program will offer 24 sessions beginning Wednesday, January 9, 2019 and ending April 17, 2019. Our ELLs attend our program on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons from 2:25 p.m. – 3:40 p.m. Attendance will be tracked on spreadsheets and kept in the main office for the duration of the program, then filed in the ELL compliance binder upon completion of the Title III program. Parents will be notified in their preferred language as available according to our schools Language Translation and Interpretation Plan about the program, reminders for start and end dates and for skipped sessions near holidays. The breakdown of activities is as follows: Title III Routines: Daily Routine: 2:26-2:40 (14 minutes) Snack/Independent workbook time 2:40-2:50 (10 minutes) Educational game time (anagrams, guess the word, hangman, sight word bingo, etc) 2:50-3:35 (45 minutes) mini-lesson and collaborative work time 3:35 Reflections and Pack up 3:41 dismissal 1.25 hours Language of Instruction:Our program is English based, but because of our diverse staff supports can be offered in Spanish, French and Bengali as needed, but the focus is on English instruction. Students will be asked to focus on English, but have the opportunity to use their home language to support each other in group work.Staffing:There will be 6 positions available 2018-19 SCEP-FL 74  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information for direct instruction for all sessions. Staffing will encompass the bulk of our budget using additional funds from the parent engagement portion. We are able to use the additional funds from the parent engagement funding because we are combining part of our direct instruction with parent engagement, inviting parents to learn and support along with their child. Priority for staffing will be given to teachers holding TESOL or bilingual certification for our Title III program. If positions are still available they will be open to other certified teachers. To ensure our students are all serviced by a certified TESOL or bilingual teacher, teachers will work in co-teaching teams with at least one TESOL/bilingual certified teacher. Teacher pairs will have a 2:16 ratio. Teachers who apply and cannot be hired will be offered the chance to substitute as needed. Types of Materials:This is a unique learning opportunity for our ELL population. It uses supplementary materials different than those used in daily instruction. Materials needed for our theater based program (LSOS), will be funded through the OTPS funds. We intend to purchase Non-fiction texts will be to research facts that match the theme of our plays. Additionally we will purchase literacy skill building workbooks for independent practice during snack time. Also, general supplies will be needed, such as pencils, markers, crayons, construction paper, and card stock, notebooks and loose-leaf. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E-->Collaboration and teamwork are essential for the Title III program to succeed. Providing professional development time to educate, analyze, plan and reflect will grow our LSOS staff and help provide better instruction to the students we serve. There will be 3 (2:26-3:26 pm) one hour staff development meetings offered to staff teaching the Title III program, led by the ENL coordinator, Linda Cavanaugh, (ENL coordinator attends monthly district meetings and will incorporate learnings into these staff development sessions). One prior to the program, one mid- way through the program and a final session after the program. Teachers will sign in for each PD at the bottom of the agenda and records will be kept in the ELL compliance binder. Additional time after school on Tuesdays during the duration of the Afterschool program may be used for planning instruction as needed, but at no cost to Title III, it is contractual time. * The initial staff development will cover co-teaching structures, language objectives and set goals for the program (December 12, 2018). *The second session will cover language progressions, academic language and review the progress of goals set in the first session (March 15, 2019). * The final session will be more reflective assessing the outcomes of student learning based on writing students produced. Teachers will analyze student writing and compare it to goals set at 2018-19 SCEP-FL 75  Part C: Professional Development the initial meeting to see if the goals of the program have been met and what can be improved to meet goals next year (May 1, 2019). Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> Parental Engagement Activities: Family outreach and family literacy is important because it strengthens the home-school connection and it builds a partnership between home and school to establish common goals and high expectations for their children’s academic success. Schedule and Duration: Parents will be invited to 2 sessions of our program, where their children will present their learning. Families will see a showcase of what students have learned, receive materials to support at home and have time to engage with their child, peers and teachers to learn ways to support learning at home. Parent participation will be documented with sign in sheets for each event. Copies of these sign in sheets will be maintained in the ELL office, room 118. Topics to be covered: Session one: play and games presentation - students will play a favorite quick educational game with families to showcase a learning game that can be played at home, then students will perform Reader’s Theater plays for families. Session two: a writing celebration - groups will share out important charts that helped them produce their writing and copies of charts will be available for families to take home to continue working with their child. Written pieces will be available for everyone to read and comment on to celebrate writing across the program. Name of Providers: All Title III staff members will attend family events to provide support, answer questions and engage with families. Students will be the primary presenters of information to families to demonstrate ownership of learning. How will parents be notified of these activities? Families are notified of these activities as they enroll their child in Title III LSOS. Invitation letters and permission slips will provide families with important dates as well as calendars for the program. We will also use Grant Avenues phone messenger system and flyers to remind 2018-19 SCEP-FL 76 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities families of important dates. All communication, oral and written, is translated into the appropriate home languages. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 2018-19 SCEP-FL 77  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 09 School Name Grant Avenue Elementary School School Number 449 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Kristin Erat Coach o ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Linda Cavanaugh Teacher/Subject Area Diana Castillo,1st Dual Teacher/Subject Area MD Rahman, ENL Related-Service Provider Anthony Marra, IEP Teacher Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Assistant Principal Asalmah George Coach o School Counselor Alba Urena Parent Rose Manzueta Parent Coordinator Lisa Cherry Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 3 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2018-19 SCEP-FL 78  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 448 Total number of ELLs 103 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 22.99% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 4 K 1 2 Spanish 2009-10 0 1 1 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Curriculum assessments: TCRWP running records in English and Spanish to track student reading levels Engage NY end of module assessments to monitor understanding of mathematics content Assessments provide valuable data to create guided reading groups, skills groups, student goals and create differentiated scaffolds for students. Guided reading groups push students reading levels, while skills groups focus explicit instruction on 2018-19 SCEP-FL 79  lacking skills based on data gathered from formative assessments. Student goals are developed with the students and necessary scaffolds are introduced to students based on the assessment data. Additional assessments: iReady online assessments - our school uses the data generated to differentiate instruction to student level within iReady and in lesson planning 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Running Records are tracked school wide using racking sheets that indicate student reading levels across the year. The students are assessed a minimum of five times throughout the year and data is shared with administration and support teachers such as ENL teachers so groups can be formed or modified based on the data. The tracking sheet makes visible stagnant reading and growth in reading, so teachers can target phonemic skills, language structure skills, fluency skills, and comprehension skills to form strategic groups. End of Module assessments are reviewed to guide small group support for reteaching. Teachers meet in grade level teams to review assessment results and establish goals for students. The data gathered in grade teams and student goals are shared with supporting ENL teachers when collaborating to help plan instruction based on student needs. iReady is used to supplement the curriculum. The data generated is used to create differentiated assignments for students within iReady and help guide small group planning 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? NYC Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) for ELA - after administering the fall MOSL teachers gather data on student results to incorporate areas of need into lesson planning. Teachers identify an area of need for the grade level to focus on and within their own class data. Teachers create checklists to monitor student progress in targeted area of need to measure student growth across the year. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The results of the fall MOSL are analyzed for grade wide and school wide trends to guide instruction throughout the year. Grade teams meet to review the data and plan instruction accordingly to meet student needs based on the data. Grade level leaders also meet to review the school wide trends that are shared school wide at staff development. ENL providers meet with teachers to review school data, class data and ELL specific data to collaborate with the classroom teachers and support students they service. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Students are referred for RTI through the Pupil Personnel Team (PPT) who meet bi-weekly. Teachers or parents recommend students who they have concerns that Tier I interventions are not working and reach out for further support through the PPT. Intervention begins with with the classroom teacher and the language service provider. They provide necessary data such as classroom observations, Running Records, teacher created math assessments, writing samples and from the EDAT tool generated from ATS. The PPT reviews data presented and makes recommendations considering program placement, date and grade of arrival, literacy in native and target languages, parent requests and concern and socio-emotional needs. The PPT recommendations are carried out for the specified timeline to track student growth before revisiting the student and determining next steps based on the initial recommendations and progress made. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSITELL to determine ELL status and proficiency NYSESLAT to determine ELL proficiency, proficiency changes and modality breakdowns 2018-19 SCEP-FL 80  Spanish LAB to determine student strength in their home language NYS ELA, Math and Science Assessment to determine student level in relation to grade level standards in content areas Data from these assessments is reviewed in the RLAT report and using EDAT. The RLAT report indicates proficiency levels of students so students can be grouped by proficiency and given their mandated amount of instruction based on proficiency level. The EDAT provides more comprehensive data combining these assessments to analyze student risk factor as well as indicate areas of strength and weakness on the NYSESLAT. Students are grouped by modality strengths and weaknesses either for peer support or skills based groups with their language teacher. Additionally teachers can provide specific targeted instruction based on students individual risk factor and the accompanying comments. Currently the data shows our ELL students are performing below grade level in ELA and math, although schoolwide we made gains in math scores. The majority of our ELL students scored a 1 on the 2017 ELA. One fourth grader scored a 3 on the ELA, demonstrating proficiency in English. In math our ELLs scored a 1 or 2 on the state exam with the exception of one student who scored a 3. We will use this data to guide ELL programing and small group instruction to push our ELLs to grade level benchmarks. The breakdown of data is as follows: ELA: ELLs who scored a 1 Expanding-6 Transitioning-7 Emerging - 1 ELLs who scored a 2 Expanding-4 Transitioning-0 Emerging - 0 Math: ELLs who scored a 1 Expanding-5 Transitioning-7 Emerging - 1 ELLs who scored a 2 Expanding-5 Transitioning-1 Emerging - 1 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Statewide assessments data is analyzed using the EDAT tool. ENL teachers share the data gathered from the NYSITELL, NYSESLAT and EDAT tool with teachers through staff development, and one on one collaboration meetings with teachers they service to help plan instruction and address individual student needs. Scheduled ENL periods are decided based on grade level and proficiency levels. Adjustments to content area programing is decided in collaboration with the classroom teacher and can be modified throughout the year as needs change when reflecting on formative data. Part IV: ELL Programming 2018-19 SCEP-FL 81  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Currently students are grouped by grade level. Since groups are determined by grade level there are various language proficiencies within a group. When populations allow, ELLs are grouped into the same class at their grade level for integrated ENL instruction in Math, Science and ELA. When only a few students cannot be placed in the same class they join the other class with the ENL teacher for their service period. ENL teachers who hold both common branch and TESOL certifications pull students out of classes to provide service if the students cannot be grouped into one class. Standalone students are grouped first by language proficiency, then based on current student levels. Students are grouped in grade bands, not exceeding two grades. For the current school year, we have four stand alone groups, kindergarten, 1-2, 3-4 and 5th grade. b. TBE program. If applicable. Currently, we do not have a transitional bilingual program but we do give information about this program during EPIC orientations that they are entitled to transfer to another school if they want to enroll their child in a TBE program. c. DL program. If applicable. Currently our DL program is offered in Kindergarten and first grade. The grouping of these students are based on program selection forms completed upon identification and their grade level. The class travels together to the next grade to keep continuity in the dual language program. Each year the program is reviewed to ensure there are sufficient ELLs and English Proficient students who are interested in the program for it to continue into the next grade level. Students in these classes are at various language proficiencies since they are grouped by grade level. Currently our Kindergarten dual language has 7 MLLs (35%) 1 Entering, 1 Emerging, 4 Transitioning, and 1 Expanding. Currently our first grade dual language has 8 MLLs (36%) 1 Entering, 1 Emerging, 5 Expanding and 1 Commanding. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school ensures mandated minutes by reviewing the ELL population numbers and program selections. Based on this data, ENL and bilingual teachers are assigned a caseload of students. Teachers schedule their programs considering state mandates acknowledging that Entering and Emerging students need 360 minutes per week, Transitioning and Expanding students need 180 minutes and Commanding students needs 90 minutes. Teachers group students ensuring all students receive the mandated service, and are programed in STARS accordingly. Integrated minutes are provided through various content areas: Grades K-2 ENL integrated minutes are provided through ELA. Grades 3-4 ENL integrated minutes are provided through Math and ELA. Grade 5 ENL integrated minutes are provided through Science, Math and ELA periods. Our dual language classes provide integrated instruction in ELA and Math. Our dual language program provides equal instruction in Spanish and English. Throughout the day, students receive language instruction tied to content to build capacity in both languages. Mornings are taught in English, Afternoons are in Spanish. The choice to build language skills within content areas, such as ELA and Math, allows dual language teachers to reach the state mandates for service for their ELL population. It also ensures all students receive language instruction and literacy instruction in both languages. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 82  3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In all program models students are supported are:Modeling to set clear expectations Clear concise directions visual supportsTPR Realia home language resources such as glossaries, and translations provided by Engage NY, and staff translations Student texts at individual reading levels, based on Guided Reading Levels Shared texts appropriate for the grade level, based on Guided Reading Levels In grades Kindergarten to 4th ELA and math are provided by classroom teachers. Currently, our fifth grade is decompartmentalized providing instruction only in English, one teacher will provide ELA instruction and the other teacher will provide math instruction. Science instruction is delivered in English by a specialty teacher. ENL teachers collaborate with the content or classroom teachers to develop scaffolds, resources and design lesson plans to help ELLs meet the demands of NYS Learning Standards. Integrated minutes are provided through various content areas: Grades K-2 ENL integrated minutes are provided through ELA. Grades 3-4 ENL integrated minutes are provided through Math and ELA. Grade 5 ENL integrated minutes are provided through Science, Math and ELA periods. Our dual language classes provide integrated instruction in ELA and Math. The Freestanding ENL service is taught in English supporting home language with glossaries and translations and the option to write in their native language. Content in the Dual Language Program in grades Kindergarten and first is primarily provided by the bilingual teacher. Math resources are provided in both English and Spanish through Engage NY translated module activities. The ELA periods share time in both languages, providing instruction in English and Spanish. Science is taught by a specialty teacher, providing instruction in English. Teachers use visuals, realia and modeling to help students access content. Dual Langauge teachers collaborate with each other and within their grade level to design lesson plans and targeted instruction to meet the demands of NYS Learning Standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In the ENL program, ELLs are not evaluated in their home language across the year. They are assessed using the Spanish LAB K-5 and SIFE resources in grades 3-5 upon enrollment, but home language is used as a scaffold not for evaluation purposes in our ENL program. Additionally students have access to home language resources such as glossaries and translations in class and for state exams. In the Dual Language program students are evaluated in their home language with TC Running Records. Running Records are done in both Spanish and English so home language and target languages are evaluated throughout the year. These assessments help teachers create student goals in both Spanish and English. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 2018-19 SCEP-FL 83  All ELL students receive differentiated instruction through small group work, peer collaboration, modeling, TPR, visuals, realia, translations and glossaries. A. Specific to our SIFE population instruction is tied to real life to give the academic work a sense of purpose and value for our SIFE students. Students are also given time to work collaboratively to foster community learning. B. Newcomers are provided with word banks and sentences frames to differentiate the work and make content more accessible. We use shared reading, guided reading, sight word and letter recognition to build reading skills. To build vocabulary, we name and label realia, picture cards and non fiction texts with picture supports. C. Developing ELLs use more advance sentence frames, word walls, vocabulary banks and oral rehearsal when writing. To build reading skills partner reading, guided reading and shared reading is used to build vocabulary and knowledge of language structure through literacy. D. Our school does not have many long term ELLs. It only applies to our 5th grade population. Our differentiation for this subgroup is to create focused individualized goals for each student to bridge gaps in language and academic skills and help students become proficient. E. Former ELLs still have access to differentiation mentioned above, but are at or near grade level and working towards independence with English language use. The focused instruction for this group is towards independence. They continue to receive integrated language skills as well as testing accommodations for 2 years after attaining English proficiency. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs adapt grade level curriculum to meet student needs. ENL and classroom teachers work collaboratively to plan instruction. Teachers refer to curriculum guides from grades above or below to tailor their instruction to meet the needs of their students, as well as state standard, language progressions and TOMs. Modeling and directions provided for each lesson are clear and explicit. Small group instruction is used to target specific content skills and book clubs and guided reading help promote literacy skills. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers of ELL-SWD review IEPs and meet with all service providers including ENL teachers to design appropriate instruction that meets IEP goals. The School Implementation Team (SIT) meets biweekly to review student data and placement. Our school offers SETTS, ICT and self contained classes. As a school we try to provide the least restrictive environment for all students including ELLs, while still providing the most beneficial setting for each student. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All interventions are delivered in English unless specified in a child’s IEP or within a dual language classroom. At times translations are used to help a student access content material, or facilitate peer collaboration, but the primary language used is English. All teachers provide small group or one to one instruction to students, including ELLs, to assess and teach skills needed for intervention. When students continue to remain stagnant, they can be discussed at PPT or SIT meetings to help address student needs and discuss referral options if appropriate. Intervention groups in classrooms, RTI, ENL and SETTS are flexible so they can change based on new data, observations, and evidence of progress. Intervention teachers use state standards, language progressions and TOMs to plan the instruction. Our Title III program gives students an opportunity to build language skills outside of the school day. Instruction is delivered in 2018-19 SCEP-FL 84  English, but students are able to collaborate in the language of their choice. Additionally parents are invited to participate in our Title III program to build a home to school connection and are free to interact with staff and students in the language of their choice. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Currently we expect no new programs. Our school is making improvements in our ENL staffing. Our ENL team is growing from 1.5 teachers to two full time teachers. They are working towards building a collaborative community to share knowledge and resources to better assist our ELL population. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? We are limiting our dual language program to kinder and first, as of this year due to the low number of ELLs enrolled in this program, and parent requests to move their child to monolingual programs as they move up grade levels. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are entitled to all school activities and are not excluded. Program scheduling is done considering student need to attend specialty classes, such as Music, Art, Physical Education, Dance, Science and Technology. ENL providers avoid removing students from these school activities planning their instruction alongside specialties or during alternate times of the day. Additionally ELLs are included in: 5th grade theater production - all 5th graders, including ELLs are welcome to participate in the school theater production put on by our music teacher. Some past productions have been Lion King, an adaptation of Stone Soup, and Wilie Wonka BYP a private after school program that is open to all students, including ELLs. Title III afterschool program that focuses on ELL populations in grades 2-5 to build listening, speaking, reading and writing skills through stories, student performance, technology and games. Test Prep Academy - a after school testing preparation program offered before state exams Change For Kids Programs - offered within the school day enrichment for students, some programs that have been available in past years are Story Pirates, chess, and guitar. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Technology available for all students including ELLs: -grades 1-5 have a technology period in their schedule giving students access to the computer lab with a technology teacher -all teachers have laptop sets for small groups giving access to technology in the classroom -iReady online program to support ELA and math the focus is on reading skills based on iReady assessments, but also builds listening skills as students have to listen and attend to directives to complete activities -BrainPop ESL is available for our ELL population to build listening skills through videos, speaking skills with repeating after a speaker and the ability to play back what was recorded, reading at the word level and short text level, and writing with use of organizers to scaffold the writing process -Duolingo is used with newcomers in grades 3-5 who have literacy in their home language to help students make connections between their home language and English. -Google Classroom to connect instruction between teachers and parents allowing students to complete written tasks or take quizzes generated through forms at home or in school -projectors and document cameras make texts, visuals, etc clearly visible for all students -Some classrooms also have Smart Boards, we are working towards all classrooms having access to Smart Boards to provide this technology for all In addition to technology, students have access hands on math and science materials. Students even experience living 2018-19 SCEP-FL 85  organisms in our science program. Teachers bring in realia, visuals and provide TPR activities to enhance learning. The hands on materials promote student discussion building speaking skills that can also be transferred into student writing. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the ENL program, ELLs are assessed in their home language the Spanish LAB K-5 and SIFE resources in grades 3-5 upon enrollment. Home language supports such as translated texts, bilingual texts, bilingual glossaries are provided as students need. As home language supports are provided for students, and left unused by the student, it is clear students need for home language support has lowered and confidence in English skills are growing. In the Dual Language program students are assessed in their home language with TC Running Records. Running Records are done in both Spanish and English so home language and target languages are evaluated throughout the year. Home language support is provided with: leveled reading texts in both Spanish and English Theme based units using realia, visuals and reference texts in both Spanish and English Palabras su paso phonics program Math resources in both languages provided through Engage NY 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. When schedules are made consideration is given to what grades and ages students are in each group. The majority of ELLs are programmed by grade level in both dual language and ENL programs. The remainder of the ELLs are grouped within two contiguous grade bands. Consideration is also given to ensure that schedules do not conflict with other student services such as speech, physical therapy, occupational therapy or counseling, as well as avoiding conflicts with enrichment opportunities or specialty periods. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Within our building there are three schools. The ENL teachers at our school have made connections with the middle school ENL teachers to share resources and support each other. Contact information was shared to reach out as needed. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). New students and their families are greeted when they arrive at school safety and the main office. Students are escorted to their classroom and introduced to their teachers. Students are screened for language services by an ENL teacher within the first days they arrive to provide them with language service support as quickly as possible. New families are often introduced to our school parent coordinator, Lisa Cherry to help transition families. In addition, staff and families sometimes reach out to the school guidance councilor, Alba Urena, for support transitioning to the new school. When students arrive with siblings we also allow students to visit their sibling's class during parts of the day to ease the transition. We also pair new students with partners who can be English models and may speak the new student’s home language to help them feel more comfortable For students who register over the summer, we have a family picnic, in August, where all students can meet their new teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently there are no language electives for any students at our school. Our only language learning opportunity is through our Spanish Dual language program in Kindergarten and first grade. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 86  18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? A The Spanish Dual language program, offered in Kindergarten and first grade, is self contained. Students who are ELLs, MLLs and EP are integrated throughout the school day with 50% of instruction in English and 50% of instruction in Spanish. B. Core content is taught in both languages with the exception of science. There are two ELA blocks and two math blocks each day. Students have access to texts in both languages to foster literacy in Spanish and English. We use Engage NY to guide our math instruction, which has Spanish translations available to teach content in both languages. Science content is provided by a specialty teacher offered only in English. C. Language is separated for instruction by time of the day. Mornings in English, afternoons in Spanish. D. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously as both ELLs and EPs work towards their target language Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ELL personnel at our school have time to collaborate, share best practices and learn from each other. ELL personnel at our school allow intervisitation to grow their practice. ELL personnel also collaborate with grade level teachers to bridge language and Statewide standards. In addition to efforts within the school ELL personnel attend outside professional development offered through the district to build teaching practices and turnkey to staff and within their own team or school wide. Teachers keep agendas, handouts and notes to track professional development. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school offers multiple professional development around ELL specific needs for staff members to help them reach the 15% of mandated hours that are ELL specific: -Workshops offered at our annual summer retreat -mini courses - short workshops for teachers to learn more about ELL instruction - Monday PD time - time allotted for all staff to review ELL data, notice trends to plan strategic instruction. - Election Day - best practices for ELLs, strategies for teaching ELLs Scheduled professional development is set in advance and topics covered are recorded on PD calendars and in weekly newsletters. Bilingual and ENL teachers attend workshops offered by the school, visit each other's classes, and workshops offered by the district or RBRN to meet the mandated 50%. Teachers keep agendas, handouts and notes to track professional development. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 87  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Teachers schedule one on one meetings or over the phone meetings to discuss student progress, needs and goals based on NYSESLAT data, classroom observation or other formative assessments. These individual meetings are scheduled at least once a year. Additionally all families are welcome to come to speak with staff every Tuesday after school without a scheduled appointment. Teachers use logs to track individualized correspondence such as phone calls letters home or one on one meetings. Logs indicate the family contacted, students discussed and notes on the meeting. During over the phone or in person meetings, teachers translate for themselves, find another staff member who speaks the family’s home language or use the translation call center. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. In addition to September meet the teacher night, two parent teacher conferences and our year end science themed parent night we have: Summer Picnic - families are invited to visit with teachers and staff to say hello to familiar faces and meet new teachers. Family Friday- families are invited in to learn or celebrate learning with the class. Every Friday at 1:30, the last period of the day. Multicultural Night - An annual after school hour celebration of family culture. Families dress in clothes from their country and bring in food to share with the school community. Title III After School - Families are invited to learn English games and technology resources with a celebration of learning the final session. PTA meetings - monthly meetings where parents and teachers come together to share ideas, parent and staff translators are available for families Parent workshops - monthly workshops are provided for families by our parent coordinator, Lisa Cherry. Parent and staff translators are available for families Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 88 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Kristin Erat, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 89  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Grant Avenue Elementary School School DBN: 09X449 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Kristin Erat Title Principal Asalmah George Assistant Principal Lisa Cherry Parent Coordinator Linda Cavanaugh ENL/Bilingual Teacher Rose Manzueta Parent MD Rahman, ENL Teacher/Subject Area Diana Castillo 1st Dual Teacher/Subject Area o o Coach Coach Alba Urena School Counselor Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Luis Quan Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Anthony Marra Other IEP Teacher o o Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2018-19 SCEP-FL 90  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X449 School Name: Grant Avenue Elementary School Superintendent: Ms. Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Jesenia Linda Medina Cavanaugh Pupil Accounting ENL teacher yes no yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At Grant Avenue we begin to assess language preferences as soon as families enter the school. Parents are greeted by office staff and will ask about language preference. When families enroll their child, they complete Home Language Identification Surveys, and Emergency contact forms. Both of these forms survey the parents preferred language of contact, both oral and written. Information on these forms is entered into ATS to record preferred parent language. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 91  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali (Bangla) Chinese Any French Mandinka (Mandingo) English Spanish Sonike Twi Wolof 4 21 2 4 1 333 148 1 1 1 .78 4.07 .39 .78 .19 64.53 28.68 .19 .19 .19 4 21 2 4 1 331 149 1 2 1 .78 4.07 .39 .78 .19 64.15 28.88 .19 .39 .19 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Registration Packets Enrollment Monthly Calendars Beginning of every month Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Bengali is translated by a staff member and copies are made to be used as needed. Oral translations are provided for languages not available for translation Monthly calendars are created before the school year begins to allow time for translation by school staff. They are updated and reviewed before distributing to families at the beginning of the month. Oral 2018-19 SCEP-FL 92  Home Language Surveys Throughout the year when families enroll a child ELL Entitlement Letters September, and throughout the year as students enroll Health Clinic Forms September, and throughout the year as students enroll Parent Teacher Conference notices September, November, March, May School Recess notices Throughout the year before school recesses Parent Brochures Available in the office year round translations are provided for languages not available for translation Translated letters are provided in the nine most common languages on the DOE intranet. Oral translations are provided for languages not available for translation Translated letters are provided in the nine most common languages on the DOE intranet. Oral translations are provided for languages not available for translation The Clinic provides translations and has documents available for families. Oral translations are provided for languages not available for translation. Templates available on Translation and Interpretation intranet site. Oral translations are provided for languages not available for translation. Templates available on Translation and Interpretation intranet site. Oral translations are provided for languages not available for translation NYC translated, oral translations are provided for languages not available for translation. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent Teacher Conferences September, November, March, May IEP meetings (annual and tri-annual) throughout the year interpretation service(s)? There are several staff members available to translate in Spanish. Additionally there are staff that speak Bengali and French. Parents are also welcome to bring their own translator that is over 18. Translation and Interpretation Services are called if there is no other available translator. There are several staff members and school based support staff available to 2018-19 SCEP-FL 93  Promotion in doubt late January to early February PTA meetings and workshops held monthly translate in Spanish. Additionally there are staff that speak Bengali and French. When staff members cannot translate, Translation and Interpretation Services are called. There are several staff members available to translate in Spanish. Additionally there are staff that speak Bengali and French. Parents are also welcome to bring their own translator that is over 18. Translation and Interpretation Services are called if there is no other available translator. PTA members offer translations as well as staff. Parents are also welcome to bring their own translator. Translation and Interpretation Services are called if there is no other available translator. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use a school wide messaging system to notify parents. Currently it operates in English and Spanish, we are working on adding other languages as families need. For emergencies regarding individual students the classroom teacher, nurse, or staff supporting the child contact the parents via phone using the translation line as needed based on parents preferred language on the emergency card. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. All staff are provided with information and an orientation meeting during professional development time about parent's preferred language, including contact information for translation services by our LAC each September. Additionally, we survey the staff for volunteers who are able to provide translations and send out survey results in the staff newsletter. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any: 2018-19 SCEP-FL 94   Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents are informed of translation services available in the office with pamphlets. Pamphlets are also sent home to make parents aware of their right to their preferred language and information about language and translation services offered through the DOE. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? After using Interpretation and Translation Services there is a survey for families to complete so we can gather feedback on the usefulness of this service. 2018-19 SCEP-FL 95 
