2018-19 SCHOOL COMPREHENSIVE EDUCATIONAL PLAN (SCEP) DBN: (i.e. 01M001): 08X452 School Name: GOTHAM COLLABORATIVE HIGH SCHOOL Principal: DAVID LIU 2018-19 SCEP-P 1  School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) Section 4: SCEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 9: Title I Program Information Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) 2018-19 SCEP-P 2 Section 1: School Information Page School Information Gotham Collaborative High School 08x452 320800011452 9-12 1980 Lafayette Ave 718 597-1587 School Number (DBN): 718 597-1371 Fax: dliu2@schools.nyc.gov School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Phone Number: David Liu School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: David Liu Email Address: Samantha Mezzina Elayna Guzman Abu Kaiser Yolanda Fontanez Lisa Marie Colomer Bryan Guzman na District Information Geographical District: 8 Superintendent’s Office Address: Carron Staple Superintendent: 1 FordhamPlaza Bronx, New York 10458 cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5834 Phone Number: 718-597-1371 Fax: FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Executive Director: Jose Ruiz 2018-19 SCEP-P 3  Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 FordhamPlaza Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-5436 Phone Number: 718-597-1371 Fax: 2018-19 SCEP-P 4  Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the SCEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) David Liu Samantha Mezzina Cheryl Short LisettePacheco Alicia Morrishaw Gabriela Luna Ayesha Morrishaw-Ashley na John Young JaymeeJackson Alyia Crew *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Student 2018-19 SCEP-P 5  MarienellaEchevarria Mariana Navarro Diana Rivera Luis Miranda Santa Roman Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent 2018-19 SCEP-P 6  Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the School Comprehensive Educational Plan The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) is a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. The process of developing and implementing the SCEP is aligned to the Framework for Great Schools. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding SCEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department has established programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students supports to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and SCEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint for continuous improvement that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to increase student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five (5) goals and action plans that align with 2018-19 SCEP-P 7  the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. Accountability Tools and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is informed by the New York State Education Department’s (NYSED) Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) Tenets, the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Rubric, School Quality Guide and other quantitative and qualitative data tools. NYSED’s Six DTSDE Tenets To strengthen the existing system, the NYSED has developed a tool that captures the best practices from each of the current tools called the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness. This new tool encompasses multiple instruments such as interviews, classroom observations and surveys. The protocol will begin with a clear and cogent statement of the optimal conditions of an effective school and the instruments comprising the protocol will measure how close or far away a particular school is to the optimal conditions identified. Once reviewed, the school and district will create a strategic plan to address the areas in need of improvement. All current Priority and Focus Schools and Focus Districts must use the tool; districts that are required to submit District Comprehensive Improvement Plans and Comprehensive Educational Plans also will use the tool. The DTSDE protocol includes a rubric, which identifies clear and coherent expectations of the optimal conditions of an effective school and school district across the following six tenets:  Tenet 1: District Leadership and Capacity  Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions  Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support  Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions  Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and  Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The 2017-18 Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: 2018-19 SCEP-P 8  Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) I. II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Structures for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the SCEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the SCEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. Next Steps for SCEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: In Part 1A of the Section 5: Needs Assessment indicate the Statement of Practice (SOP) from the DTSDE Tenets that will be addressed in the action plan. Schools that received an Integrated Intervention Team (IIT) School Review should use the recommendations from the review to select their SOPs. Schools that did not undergo an IIT review should select SOPs informed by the major findings/recommendations from your most recent Quality Review (QR) or Central-led Review (CLR), and other qualitative and quantitative data.  Step 4: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you 2018-19 SCEP-P 9  monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 5: Build consensus around activities, strategies and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 6: Step 6: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 7: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 2018-19 SCEP-P 10  Section 4: SCEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Mission of Gotham Collaborative High School is to create an equitable learning community that ensures each student has access to the resources and supports needed to reach their highest potential. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Gotham Collaborative High School has spawn from the consolidation between Pablo Neruda Academy and The Bronx Guild. The consolidation will allow us to engage students in productive struggle, where they will develop perseverance and critical thinking skills. Students will master these skills through multiple approaches and create meaningful post-secondary plans, guided by real-world experiences connected to their learning. Our partnership with the Institute for Student Achievement, New York City Writing Project ensures that we are on the forefront of the state’s shifts to the Common Core Standards. This is particularly important as our school serves a population where 33% of students have special needs and 16% are ELL. We serve students that enter at PL 1 and 2, and traditionally have a target graduation rate around 48%. Our partnerships with internship sites allow us to foster an internship program that allows 11th and 12th grade students the ability to be an intern off campus for multiple days during the week. This is very important in supporting Career Development and Occupational Study skills. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school serves a population where 33% of students have special needs and 16% are ELL students. The population usually have challenges with Quantile literacy and literacy skills, and require additional support with those skills in order to master CCLS. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Year one of our consolidation has shown us a large increase in trust as a school as measured by the School Survey. Teachers, Parents, and Students trust with the school and it's leadership has improved across the different contingencies. Our goal for this year is to unite instruction and curriculum as one school. 2018-19 SCEP-P 11  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X452 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 553 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 5 6 13 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 6 6 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 1 School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 84.6% % Reduced Lunch 15.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.0% 58.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.25 5% 36% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 63% 57% 61.9% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No No Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District Yes Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A YES Yes N/A 174 167 3 79.6% 0.9% 29.3% 30.7% 6.1% 2.2% 4 68% 4.3 N/A N/A 56% 56% 63.8% 1% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES 2018-19 SCEP-P 12  2018-19 SCEP-P 13  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 3: Curriculum Development and Support) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 3 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 3.2 The school leader ensures and supports the quality implementation of a systematic plan of rigorous and coherent curricula appropriately aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) that is monitored and adapted to meet the needs of students. Teachers develop and ensure that unit and lesson plans used include data-driven instruction (DDI) protocols that are appropriately aligned to the CCLS and NYS content standards and address student achievement needs. The school leader and teachers have developed a comprehensive plan for teachers to partner within and across all grades and subjects to create interdisciplinary curricula targeting the arts, technology, and other enrichment opportunities. Teachers implement a comprehensive system for using formative and summative assessments for strategic short and long-range curriculum planning that involves student reflection, tracking of, and ownership of learning. 3.3 3.4 3.5 SOP(s) Addressed N/A X N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The school-wide instructional program for Gotham Collaborative is based on Understanding by Design. All curricula are written in house by teachers and administration using core curricula as a foundation and are all aligned to CCLS standards. The priority need that will be addressed is improving student mastery of CCLS. The priority need that will be addressed is alignment in our curriculum as well as increasing student engagement through improved questioning and discussion techniques.. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of coherent professional development plan around questioning and discussions, by June 2019 teacher performance in questioning and discussion will improve by .25 as measured by the ADVANCE rubric. 2018-19 SCEP-P 14  2018-19 SCEP-P 15  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Instructional Activities/Strategies: ● School leaders will provide professional development to instructional teacher leaders on Questioning and Discussions Instructional Teacher Leaders Teachers ● The Great Books Foundation will support curriculum development that allows for multiple entry points into the curricula, as well as integrate Question and Discussion Techniques into all classrooms. ● The Great Books Foundation will provide coaching to instructional teacher leaders ● The Institute for Student Achievement will continue to provide Math support and coaching to math teachers with a new found focus around our instructional focus on Questioning and Discussions. Activities/Strategies to address the needs of student subgroups: ● School leaders will provide time for department teams to "tune" unit plans, using a protocol, to ensure all levels of learners (multiple entry points) are being addressed and strategies related tot he instructional focus are included ● Institute for student Achievement will provide curriculum support to teachers to develop curricula with multiple entry points to support various subgroups. ● F-status (.6) Assistant Principal will manage the School Implementation Team. This team will ensure Gotham Collaborative meets the needs of students with disabilities in the areas of access to appropriately rigorous curriculum to prepare students with disabilities for College and Career Readiness, and independent living through an authentic transition planning process. Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● Internship Coordinator ● School Partners All Teachers Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● All Teachers ● School Partners 2018-19 SCEP-P 16  ● Grade teams will look at report card scores to gauge effectiveness of strategy in closing the achievement gap between SpEd males and the rest of the population. SLT members; Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: Activities/Strategies to increase parent involvement: ● The SLT and PTA will be informed of the progress of the activities and strategies detailed above to ensure there are opportunities for parent support and feedback. PTA members ● SLT Chairperson ● PTA President ● Parent Coordinator ● SLT members ● PTA members Activities/Strategies that address the capacity framework element of Trust: Entire School Community Sept. 2018 - June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● All members of the school community have an opportunity to work on creating goals that address improving student outcomes (Teacher Teams; SLT; PTA; UFT Consultation Committee; Student Council) ● Principal ● Assistant Principals ● Teachers ● Parents ● Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Activities/Strategies to increase parent involvement: ● The SLT and PTA will be informed of the progress of the activities and strategies detailed above to ensure there are opportunities for parent support and feedback. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. * Parent Involvement funds to increase parent participation in the SLT and PTA (Paid with Title I Funds) * Weekly Instructional Teacher meetings after school * PD Calendar and plan will have at least 5 sessions dedicated to supporting teachers in improving in DOmain 1 for the GOal. 2018-19 SCEP-P 17  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. · By February 2019, all of the teachers will receive PD via the great books foundation and receive feedback via walkthroughs with the lens focusing on Questioning and Discussion. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE data will be used to monitor teacher mastery of Questioning and DIscussion. Report card grades will be used to monitor student mastery in the classroom. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 18  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 5 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 5.2 The school leader establishes overarching systems and understandings of how to support and sustain student social and emotional developmental health and academic success. 5.3 The school articulates and systematically promotes a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum or program that provides learning experiences and a safe and healthy school environment for families, teachers, and students. 5.4 All school stakeholders work together to develop a common understanding of the importance of their contributions in creating a school community that is safe, conducive to learning, and fostering of a sense of ownership for providing social and emotional developmental health supports tied to the school’s vision. 5.5 The school leader and student support staff work together with teachers to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. SOP(s) Addressed X N/A N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In school year 2017/18, grade teams developed the use of a S rewards program where teachers and staff reward students for positive behavior. However those extrinsic motivations have not translated to intrinsic developments. Our priority need is to tier our system to link rewards to actual skills and development in order to link extrinsic rewards with intrinsic social emotional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools –Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of improved and consistent use of the PBIS rewards program, suspension rates will be reduced overall by 10%, with the subgroup of male special education student’s suspension rates improving by 15%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 19  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). All staff will be provided access to PBIS rewards. Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) All Students Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: Activities/Strategies to address the needs of student subgroups: All  Leadership and grade team leaders will meet weekly to create a rubric of behavior. Students  Grade teams will meet consistently to plan appropriate PBIS rewards for their grade.  HerStory will provide programming for our students geared towards student empowerment in interdisciplinary CCLS-aligned units as means to build trust amongst students. September 2018 – June 2019 SLT members; PTA members September 2018 – June 2019 Activities/Strategies to increase parent involvement: ● The SLT and PTA will be informed of the progress of the activities and strategies detailed above to ensure there are opportunities for parent support and feedback. ● F-status Assistant Principal will oversee the Communication Team. This team will increase communication to the school community in order to ensure students, parents, and other members are well informed of GCHS activities, including activities that target social and emotional support, such as the anti-bullying campaign. ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● All Teachers ● UFT Teacher Center Teacher ● School Partner Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Principal ● Assistant Principal Dean Social Worker Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● SLT Chairperson ● PTA President ● Parent Coordinator ● SLT members ● PTA members ● Assistant Principal 2018-19 SCEP-P 20  Activities/Strategies that address the capacity framework element of Trust: ● All members of the school community have an opportunity to work on creating goals that address improving student outcomes (Teacher Teams; SLT; PTA; UFT Consultation Committee; Student Council) ● Social Worker will support the New Student Orientation team. This team works on orienting and building relationships among staff and incoming students so that they become involved and participate in fostering a positive school community and culture. ● HerStory (school partner) will provide programming for our students geared towards student empowerment to foster a culture where students feel supported. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Entire School Community June 2018 – June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Principal ● Assistant Principals ● Teachers ● Parents ● Students ● Social Worker ● School Partner How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The SLT and PTA will be informed of the progress of the activities and strategies detailed above to ensure there are opportunities for parent support and feedback. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Weekly Grade team leader meetings Grade team PBIS budget to reward positive behavior Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Distributive leadership teams will use their data (PBIS Rewards, OORS) to determine improvements in student social emotional growth. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 2018-19 SCEP-P 21  PBIS Rewards reports; OORS reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 22  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 4: Teacher Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 4 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 4.2 School and teacher leaders ensure that instructional practices and strategies are organized around annual, unit, and daily lesson plans that address all student goals and needs. SOP(s) Addressed N/A 4.3 Teachers provide coherent, and appropriately aligned Common Core Learning Standards X (CCLS)-based instruction that leads to multiple points of access for all students. 4.4 Teachers and students work together to implement a program/plan to create a learning environment that is responsive to students’ varied experiences and tailored to the strengths and needs of all students. N/A 4.5 Teachers inform planning and foster student participation in their own learning process by using a variety of summative and formative data sources (e.g., screening, interim measures, and progress monitoring). Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. N/A 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The priority need that will be addressed is alignment in our curriculum. In our consolidation, the combining of two cultures saw a lot of misalignment within departments and grade teams. Our ADVANCE teacher performance data shows a direct effect on student engagement and student discussions. School wide student perception data also shows a lack of opportunity for students to engage in the work. Our priority area is to provide better classroom instruction where students are more engaged in learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will have their lesson plans reviewed by peers, and be provided with feedback to better align to CCLS and ensure plans have proper Differentiation plans that address student barriers. 2018-19 SCEP-P 23  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Activities/Strategies: All Teachers ● Professional development opportunities (inside school) around the Curriculum map expectation ● Department teams will review unit plans to ensure we have aligned curriculum. Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) September 2018 – June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Principal Activities/Strategies to address the needs of student subgroups: ● School leaders will provide time for Department teams to review, provide feedback, and support Unit Plans of all teachers Teachers (Content representatives) September 2018 – June 2019 Activities/Strategies to increase parent involvement: ● The SLT and PTA will be informed of the progress of the activities and strategies detailed above to ensure there are opportunities for parent support and feedback. SLT members; PTA members September 2018 – June 2019 ● Assistant Principal ● Seven Teachers ● School Partners Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● Seven Teachers Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● SLT Chairperson ● PTA President ● Parent Coordinator ● SLT members Activities/Strategies that address the capacity framework element of Trust: Entire School Community ● All members of the school community have an opportunity to work on creating goals that address improving student outcomes (Teacher Teams; SLT; PTA; UFT Consultation Committee; Student Council) September 2018 – June 2019. ● PTA members Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Principal 2018-19 SCEP-P 24  ● Assistant Principals ● Teachers ● Parents ● Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The SLT and PTA will be informed of the progress of the activities and strategies detailed above to ensure there are opportunities for parent support and feedback. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Weekly Department Meetings Weekly Department Team Leader Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2018, 50% of teacher units will be reviewed as measured by agenda notes Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE, Domain 1 Teacher ratings Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 25  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 2: School Leader Practices and Decisions) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 2 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 2.2 The school leader ensures that the school community shares the Specific, Measurable, Ambitious, Results-oriented, and Timely (SMART) goals/mission and long-term vision inclusive of core values that address the priorities outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan (SCEP). Leaders make strategic decisions to organize programmatic, human, and fiscal capital resources. 2.3 2.4 The school leader has a fully functional system in place aligned to the district's Annual Professional Performance Review (APPR) to conduct targeted and frequent observation and track progress of teacher practices based on student data and feedback. 2.5 Leaders effectively use evidence-based systems and structures to examine and improve critical individual and school-wide practices as defined in the SCEP (student achievement, curriculum and teacher practices; leadership development; community/family engagement; and student social and emotional developmental health). SOP(s) Addressed X N/A N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. I In the 2018/19 school year, the school seeks to continue year two of the consolidation into one school. To further align the school community, we will have clear school goals, with distributive leadership teams working towards the same goal. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART– Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of grade teams analyzing the connection between attendance data and student achievement data, by June 2019, final course averages will improve by 3% with SpEd Males improving by 10%. 2018-19 SCEP-P 26  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Instructional Activities/Strategies:  Grade teams will review student and support students via kid talk  Attendance team will check in weekly in order to support at-risk students All Teachers September 2018 – June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● Grade Team Leaders All Teachers Grade teams composed of teachers from each subject area and a Special Education teacher, administration, School Social Worker Activities/Strategies to address the needs of student subgroups: All students September 2018 – June 2019  Grade teams will be implementing intervention strategies to  support at-risk students. F-status (.6) Assistant Principal meets with School Implementation Team to ensure Gotham Collaborative meet the needs of students with disabilities in the areas of access to appropriately rigorous curriculum to prepare students with disabilities for College and Career Readiness, and independent living through an authentic transition planning process.  Attendance teams will differentiate caseloads based on best strategy to support. Activities/Strategies to increase parent involvement: ● The SLT and PTA will be informed of the progress of the activities and strategies detailed above to ensure there are opportunities for parent support and feedback SLT members; PTA members September 2018 – June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● SLT Chairperson ● PTA President ● Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-P 27  Activities/Strategies that address the capacity framework element of Trust: ● All members of the school community have an opportunity to work on creating goals that address improving student outcomes (Teacher Teams; SLT; PTA; UFT Consultation Committee; Student Council) Entire School Community September 2018 – June 2019 ● SLT members ● PTA members Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Principal ● Assistant Principals ● Teachers ● Parents ● Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The SLT and PTA will be informed of the progress of the activities and strategies detailed above to ensure there are opportunities for parent support and feedback Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. F- Status AP Weekly Grade Team Meetings Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I 1003(a) Title III Title I TA PTA Funded X P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, schoolwide attendance will be at least 83%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS 2018-19 SCEP-P 28  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 29  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. (Aligned to DTSDE Tenet 6: Family and Community Engagement) Part 1 – Needs Assessment Part 1a. Alignment to DTSDE Statements of Practice Tenet 6 Statement of Practice Consider each Statement of Practice (SOP) below, and identify at least one. Place an “X” in the appropriate box indicating SOP(s) addressed in this action plan. 6.2 The school leader ensures that regular communication with students and families fosters their high expectations for student academic achievement. 6.3 The school engages in effective planning and reciprocal communication with family and community stakeholders so that student strength and needs are identified and used to augment learning. 6.4 The school community partners with families and community agencies to promote and provide training across all areas (academic and social and emotional developmental health) to support student success. 6.5 The school shares data in a way that promotes dialogue among parents, students, and school community members centered on student learning and success and encourages and empowers families to understand and use data to advocate for appropriate support services for their children. SOP(s) Addressed N/A X N/A N/A Part 1b. Needs/Areas of Focus: Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the SOP(s) selected above and the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Integrated Intervention Team Review, Central-led Review, Quality Review, NYSED Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness Self-Reflection, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths ● 2 Full time school counselors; 2 Full time social workers ● CCR program that supports College Access for all Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1b, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of an increase in the number of parent workshops offered and consistent parent outreach, by June 2019, overall parental approval ratings will increase by 5%, as measured by the parent portion of the School Survey. 2018-19 SCEP-P 30  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? (include school, educational consultants and/or CBO staff) Instructional Activities/Strategies: Parents; Students Sept 2018 - June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers:  Skedula/PupilPath will be made available for use by all staff, parents, and students in order to increase the ability for parents to track and monitor their students’ performance and progress.  Mailings will occur each month; which will include a monthly school newsletter, progress reports, report cards, Ed plans, and other important information for parents and students (i.e. honor roll notices, PupilPath logins, opt-out letters, conference information, school surveys, etc.) Global Connect / School Messenger will be used to make automated phone calls to homes regarding important dates, meetings, student attendance, etc. Activities/Strategies to address the needs of student subgroups: ● Workshops will be made available to parents of high-need students around targeted topics that support these families ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● Business Manager ● Parent Coordinator Parents; Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Parent Coordinator ● Guidance Counselor ● PTA Members Activities/Strategies to increase parent involvement: Parents; Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Family events will be at a variety of times throughout the year to celebrate students (Honor Roll ceremonies, National Honor Society induction) and provide opportunities for parents, students, and teachers to connect (i.e. Back-to-School night, Senior night, Financial Aid workshops, conferences) ● Principal ● Assistant Principal ● Parent Coordinator 2018-19 SCEP-P 31  Activities/Strategies that address the capacity framework element of Trust: ● All members of the school community have multiple an opportunity to work on creating goals that address improving student outcomes (Teacher Teams; SLT; PTA; UFT Consultation Committee; Student Council 3b – Parent and Family Engagement ● Guidance Counselor ● PTA Members Parents; Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Point Person (S) and Implementers: ● Principal ● Assistant Principals ● Teachers ● Parents If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. All members of the school community have multiple an opportunity to work on creating goals that address improving student outcomes (Teacher Teams; SLT; PTA; UFT Consultation Committee; Student Council Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Skedula will be purchased to monitor student achievement and communicate with parents and families. Two Special Education teachers will be hired to expand this program and strengthen post-high school planning. Parent Involvement funding will be used to support college trips. Per session will also be allocated for the facilitation of college night for parents. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy Title I 1003(a) Title I SWP Title III Title I TA X PTA Funded P/F Set-aside SIG Grant 21st Century School Achievement Funding C4E Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent attendance sheets for College meetings, Parent Teacher Conferences and student college application spreadsheets.Also, the SLT will discuss family attendance at college events and decide next steps for action. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Attendance of families workshops/events, Skedula communication. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 32  2018-19 SCEP-P 33  Section 6: Expanded Learning Time (ELT) Program Description Directions: Expanded Learning Time activities are directly aligned to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools, Rigorous Instruction, Supportive Environment, and Strong Family and Community Ties. ELT provides enriching educational experiences that happen outside of the traditional school day and blend skill acquisition, relationship-building and fun to foster academic and social-emotional growth. Summer learning, afterschool programming, and extended-day ELT models, when well-implemented, play a critical role in supporting students in all grades and ensuring that they graduate from high school, college and career ready. SED requires that Priority schools offer a minimum of 200 additional student contact hours as Expanded Learning Time in addition to the current mandated length of 900 hours of instruction per year (25 hours per week) in grades K-6 and 990 hours of instruction per year (27.5 hours per week) in grades 7-12. Effective ELT models will blend school staff with community partners, and will provide a balanced curriculum that can include ELA, Math, STEM, arts, physical activity, and leadership development. Complete the sections on this page to demonstrate how the school will meet these requirements. Part 1 – ELT Program Goal(s) Describe the summative goal(s) of the ELT program for the 2018-19 school year. Be sure to construct the goal to be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Time-bound. By June 208, as a result of our ELT program, student mastery of Common Core Learning Standards will increase by 10 percent overall as measured by the student scholarship Part 2 – ELT Program Type Is the ELT program voluntary or compulsory? Voluntary X Compulsory If the ELT program is voluntary, indicate how you will actively encourage the participation of all students, with the goal of serving at least 50% of students. All 9th, 10th, and 11th grade students will be programmed for compulsory ELT 4 days a week. The classes will be designed to target CCLS skills necessary for students to achieve success on CC aligned exams. Part 3 – ELT Program Description The ELT program will be offered to all students eligible for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), with the goal of serving a minimum of fifty percent of AIS-eligible students. Describe how the school will meet the following SED requirements for an ELT program in a Priority School:  Integrate academics, enrichment, and skill development through hands-on experiences that make learning relevant and engaging.  Offer a range of activities that capture student interest and strengthen student engagement in learning so as to promote higher attendance, reduce risk for retention or drop out, and increase the likelihood of graduation.  Actively address the unique learning needs and interests of all types of students, especially those who may benefit from approaches and experiences not offered in the traditional classroom setting.  Contain components designed to improve student academic, social, and emotional outcomes, including opportunities for enrichment programs such as in music and art.  Ensure instruction in any core academic subject offered in the program will be delivered under the supervision of a teacher who is NYS certified in that particular content area.  Engage in outreach activities made to families. ENL teachers will coordinate with AIS teachers to adapt curriculum as well as provide small group interventions to support ENL student needs. Part 4 – ELT Program Implementation and Oversight Part 4a. Who will implement the ELT program? Who will oversee the program? 2018-19 SCEP-P 34  1. 2. Indicate the key personnel that will be responsible for implementing and overseeing the ELT program, including school-based staff and any high-quality community partners that will be involved. If applicable, describe the scope of involvement of all community partners and how the joint ELT program is structured. 3. Explain how you will evaluate the program to assess impact on student achievement.  Administration will program and provide support for after school classes  Administration will provide coaching services to all subjects to better align to CCLS.  Greatbooks will provide coaching services to all subjects to support engagement in the classroom Part 4b. Timeline for implementation and completion, including start and end dates. ELT after school classes will begin the first day of school Part 5 – ELT Budget and Resource Alignment Part 5a. Indicate resources needed including human resources, instructional resources, and schedule adjustments to implement the ELT program. Additional Support Staff after school is needed to support AIS services for ELL afterschool students Part 5b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support the ELT Program. Note: If the program is funded by 21st Century Community Center Learning Funds, it must be offered in conjunction with a high quality, high capacity community partner. 21st Century Title I 1003(a) X Tax Levy X Title III Title I SWP PTA Funded Title I TA SIG Grant P/F Set-aside C4E School Achievement X Other Funding Part 6 – ELT Progress Monitoring Part 6a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Student progress toward mastering common core learning standards will increase by 3% by the 2nd Performance Series Assessment. Part 6b. Indicate the instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Performance Series Part 6c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2018-19 SCEP-P 35  Section 7: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) We will use Skedulato use scholarship reports to determine students failing each marking period. There are five marking periods in each term. We will use Skedulato use scholarship reports to determine students failing each marking period. There are five marking periods in each term. We will use Skedulato use scholarship reports to determine students failing each marking period. There are five marking periods in each term. We will use Skedulato use scholarship reports to determine students failing each marking period. There are five Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Read 180, Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops During school day, after school, Saturday School. Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops During school day, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops During school day, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops During school day, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops 2018-19 SCEP-P 36 At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) marking periods in each term. We will use Skedulato use scholarship data, as well as teacher and social worker referrals to determine students who are failing or at-risk each marking period. There are five marking periods each term. Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops Small group work, one on one instruction, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops During school day, after school tutoring, Saturday workshops 2018-19 SCEP-P 37  Section 8: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 36 students We provide resources such as cosmetics and grooming aids, clothing, back packs and school supplies. We have an on site washer and dryer to help with laundry and grooming. School social worker Lorin Schneider checks in with each student to assess needs, stress and coping skills, and provides information about outsider resources. We have after school homework club and individual tutoring for all students who need it. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2018-19 SCEP-P 38  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 2018-19 SCEP-P 39  Section 9: Title I Program Information Directions:  All schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the strategies and activities for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, staff, and paraprofessionals that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). School wide PD is calendared in weekly, for two hours; Administrators and support staff attend central PD; All staff are encouraged to attend off site PD when applicable and appropriate. In addition, PROSE calendar allows us an additional 6 60 minute blocks of PD during the year as supplemental PD times. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. na 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). na Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) 2018-19 SCEP-P 40  Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/information, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction.  MOSL committee – Standard MOSL committee in the school  Data cycle structure decided collaboratively with teacher leaders of the school (Department Heads and Grade Team Leaders) 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds enables, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (SCEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Title I School Improvement 1003(a) Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funds Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) 1Explanation/Background: Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 203,820.00 0 0 0 11,200.00 0 2,358,658.00 X x x x X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, b, c, d, e part 4b na na na 5a part 4b 5a, b, c, d, e part 4b 2018-19 SCEP-P 41  Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I School Improvement 1003(a): To support implementation of school improvement activities identified through the Diagnostic Tool for School and District Effectiveness (DTSDE) reviews or a school review with district oversight and included in the DCIP/SCEP.  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: To support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs.  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 2018-19 SCEP-P 42   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan.  Title I Priority and Focus School Parent Engagement Set-aside: Additional set-aside is to enable greater and  more meaningful parent participation in the education of their children. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process, including Title I 1003(g) SIG funds: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2018-19 SCEP-P 43  Section 10: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Gotham Collaborative High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Gotham Collaborative High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 2018-19 SCEP-P 44  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 2018-19 SCEP-P 45  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The Gotham Collaborative High School is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Gotham Collaborative High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 2018-19 SCEP-P 46  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Parental Involvement and School Quality To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 2018-19 SCEP-P 47  to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact School-Parent Compact (SPC) The Gotham Collaborative High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 2018-19 SCEP-P 48  I. School Responsibilities: Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 2018-19 SCEP-P 49  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 2018-19 SCEP-P 50  ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 2018-19 SCEP-P 51  ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 2018-19 SCEP-P 52  ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities 2018-19 SCEP-P 53  Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2018-19 SCEP-P 54  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): K 6 1 7 2 8 3 9 4 10 5 11 12 23 2018-19 SCEP-P 55  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 4 1 4 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAMS:We provide our Beginner and lower Intermediate ELLs and our ELL students who have IEPs withadditional instruction in a small group setting. Title III funds would be used to pay one ESL teacher toprovide instruction to these groups after school. The teacher would work with theBeginner/Intermediate ELL students (10 students) once a week for one hour (3-4pm) for the entireschool year (33 weeks). This teacher would also work with the SPED/ELL students (15 students) once aweek for one hour (3-4pm) for the entire school year (34 weeks). The teacher will utilize resources thatwe have previously purchased through Title III funds (i.e. Reading Explorer, Side by Side) as well as thetechnology resources we are planning on purchasing (Elmos, SmartBoard). Title III funds would cover theper session cost of this teacher (66 sessions x 1 hr x 51.51 = $3400). In addition to the weekly after school program described above, we will provide our ELL students withRegents Prep, with a focus on the English Regents, two times a year prior the two Regentsadministration periods. One ESL teacher will teach these prep classes, which will take place for 2 hoursafter school for 6 sessions in January and then 2 hours after school for 6 sessions in June. The EnglishRegents is the most difficult exam for our ELLs and therefore we want to provide them with extrasupport for this exam prior to the January and June Regents exams. Title III funds would cover the persession cost for this teacher (12 sessions x 2 hrs x 51.51 = $1236). We will also use Title III funds to purchase Achieve 3000, a software program that will be utilized by ourESL teachers in these after school programs to help differentiate their instruction for the different levelsof English Langauge Learners in their classes. This program allows teachers to provide non-fiction textsat varying levels, based on students' lexile scores. Teachers can select content based on what is goingon in students' classes (i.e. Science), and Achieve 3000 will provide text based on their selection.Students will then read the text, at their appropriate level, and answer comprehension questions. Thisprogram has been proved to increase students' literacy proficiency and improve their reading andwriting skills. ($2000). SATURDAY ACADEMY:In the Spring Semester, beginning in Febrary, for 15 weeks, we will provide our ELL students withadditional opportunities for support in current classes, as well as an opportunity to attain an electivecredit through our Saturday Academy program. One ESL teacher will work with a group of about 30students to provide additional instruction in English using graphic novels that also tie in Social Studiesconcepts. The main focus of the class will be on building key skills that will translate into success inEnglish and Social Studies classes. Title III funds will cover the cost of per sesson for this teacher (15sessions x 4 hrs x 51.51 = $3091). 2018-19 SCEP-P 56  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Title III Funding breakdown:Direct to instruction --> Weekly After school program ($3400) + Regents Prep ($1236) + SaturdayAcademy ($3091) = $7727 (69% of $11,200)OTPS --> Achieve 3000 = $2000 (18% of $11,200) Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: We assess the needs of our staff through surveys throughout the year (at the beginning of the year,after every PD, at the end of the year, and other times as needed). We also meet with our ESL teachersmonthly to gather anecdotal evidence of the needs of our staff and students and areas that people needsupport. After gathering data from these various data sources, the highest area of need for our staff andwill provide the most impact for our students is around the area of how to scaffold and differentiate inthe heterogenous classroom. We will provide our teachers with PD and coaching on how to create unitplans and lesson plans that include effective differentiation strategies for different types of learners(varying levels of ELLs). We will also have a coach work with our ESL teachers and their co-teachers onhow to best utilize co-teaching models in the classroom. The PDs on unit and lesson planning, with a focus on differentiation, will occur monthly and will be ledby administrators and teachers. The coaching we will provide is by a Literacy Coach from the Institute ofStudent Achievement (ISA). The coach will work with the ESL teachers and their co-teachers once amonth during their common planning and prep periods (55-110 minutes a month, 8 months of the year).We will be using Title III funds to cover the cost of the coaching. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: We evaluate the needs of parents by conducting surveys as well as participating in discussions at parentmeetings, and making phone calls home. Based on this information, we provide monthly workshops atthe school about a variety of topics that would be of interest to ELL parents (i.e. the rights of ELL parentsand students, parent resources on Skedula academic interventions ELL parents can provide at home,health and wellness, etc.). We also focus on teaching parents about the technology resources they haveavailable to them through the school in order to communicate with teachers as well as check in on theirchildren’s academic progress. These activities take place about once a month in the evenings (30-60minutes). The providers of these workshops vary; they could be our teachers and/or staff, parentcoordinator, community based organizations, 2018-19 SCEP-P 57 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities and other partners. We would like to use Title III funds for the purchase of materials and refreshments for parent involvement activities. In addition, we communicate with our parents through mailings. Monthly mailings may includenewsletters, information about parent events, college resources, etc. The contents of the mailing arealso translated by our bilingual Parent Coordinator. In addition, if a parent needs translation in alanguage other than Spanish, we find staff members (i.e. a para who speaks Bengali) or make use of theDOE translation and interpretation unit to translate. We would like to use Title III funds to purchasepaper, envelopes, and postage for these mailings, as well as materials and refreshments for parentinvolvement activities. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $ Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $ 2018-19 SCEP-P 58  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information Borough Bronx District 08 School Name Gotham Collaborative High School School Number 452 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal David Liu Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Niove Theoharides Teacher/Subject Area Magdalena Pena Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Annie Heller Coach N/A School Counselor Kristy Lebron Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Lisette Pacheco Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) N/A C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 4 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification 0 Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0- Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 522 2018-19 SCEP-P 59 Total number of ELLs 83 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.90%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): n/a If yes, indicate language(s): n/a Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use baseline assessments in all core classes (English, Math, Social Studies, Science) to gather data and assessthe literacy skills of our ELLs at the beginning of the year. Interim assessments are administered throughout the year, inall core classes, to assess the progress of our ELLs. We use the results from these assessments, as well asNYSESLAT and Regents results, to guide us in our programming and determine the type of support our students andteachers will need. The majority of our ELLs need additional support with building reading and writing skills, thereforewe have scheduled them for additional ELA support during the school day as well as after school and on Saturdays.We are also providing more PD opportunities to help develop our teachers’ teaching strategies in these areas. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Interim assessments are administered throughout the year, in all core classes, to assess the progress of our ELLs. 2018-19 SCEP-P 60  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We use baseline assessments in all core classes (English, Math, Social Studies, Science) to gather data and assessthe literacy skills of our ELLs at the beginning of the year. Interim assessments are administered throughout the year, inall core classes, to assess the progress of our ELLs. We use the results from these assessments, as well asNYSESLAT and Regents results, to guide us in our programming and determine the type of support our students andteachers will need. The majority of our ELLs need additional support with building reading and writing skills, thereforewe have scheduled them for additional ELA support during the school day as well as after school and on Saturdays.We are also providing more PD opportunities to help develop our teachers’ teaching strategies in these areas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Interim assessments are administered throughout the year, in all core classes, to assess the progress of our ELLs. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] This is not applicable; we are a high school with grades 9-12. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use baseline assessments in all core classes (English, Math, Social Studies, Science) to gather data and assessthe literacy skills of our ELLs at the beginning of the year. Interim assessments are administered throughout the year, inall core classes, to assess the progress of our ELLs. We use the results from these assessments, as well asNYSESLAT and Regents results, to guide us in our programming and determine the type of support our students andteachers will need. The majority of our ELLs need additional support with building reading and writing skills, thereforewe have scheduled them for additional ELA support during the school day as well as after school and on Saturdays.We are also providing more PD opportunities to help develop our teachers’ teaching strategies in these areas. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Interim assessments are administered throughout the year, in all core classes, to assess the progress of our ELLs. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Each grade follows a block model, with a dedicated ELL stream that the students follow. ELL students in each gradereceive services in a general education setting with heterogeneous classes. This gives students the opportunity tointeract with peers and discuss ideas and projects. Instruction is based on projects and group work, which allowsfor multiple forms of assessments. Our instructional practices assess aspects of English that students need toknow and apply to succeed in content areas. Many of our students who struggle with academic skills are assisted by other students who are part of theircooperative learning groups. These peer-tutors serve as resources to help learn both content and Englishlanguage skills. As a result, students who at the beginning level of English language acquisition are assistedthrough their native language with skills that demonstrate competency in content as well as language transferskills. Intermediate and Advanced students sharpen their language skills through presentations and 2018-19 SCEP-P 61  portfolioconstruction. There are extensive extracurricular activities including campus-wide arts and sports as well as afterschool tutoring. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Instruction is delivered primarily through Push-In (Co-Teaching) services. Expanding (Advanced) ELLs in each streamreceive at least one period of push-in support from an ELL teacher each day. Transitioning (Intermediate) ELLs in eachstream receive at least two periods of push-in support from an ELL teacher every day. Emerging (Low Intermediate) andEntering (Beginner) ELLs receive at least two periods of push-in support from an ELL teacher as well as an additionalstand-alone ELL class. All 9th grade ELLs receive a writing class which is taught by an ELL teacher each day. In addition,all ELL students who have IEPs also receive push-in support once a day in their small Student Learning Communitiescourse. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content is delivered primarily in English. Content and ESL teachers use bilingual strategies, such as providingtranslated texts or directions, with Spanish-speaking students when appropriate. In order to help ELLs developknowledge through complex texts, beginner ELLs are given the option to read texts in their native language. Texts aremade comprehensible for intermediate and advanced ELLs through the addition of text-specific bilingual dictionariesand direct teaching of language structures prevalent in the text. In order to facilitate these students in using evidencein discussion and writing, we provide academic sentence starters and directly teach the language structures they willhave to produce. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL teachers work with general education teachers to translate assessments for ELLs. In addition, we providestudents with bilingual glossaries (word to word translations) for all assessments. All Regents exams that are availablein a students&#39; native language are provided to the students. In addition, students are encouraged to write in their nativelanguage. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a. SIFE students have at least 2 classes a day co-taught by an ESL teacher and content teacher. To help themdevelop reading and writing skills they are also enrolled in Read 180 after school where they can practice literacyskills at their own level and pace. b. Newcomers have at least 2 classes a day that are co-taught by an ESL teacher and content teacher. They alsohave an advisory period and after school class twice a week with an ESL teacher where they work on developingthe reading, writing, listening, and speaking skills they need to be successful in their content classes. c. Depending on their level, ELLs receiving services for 4-6 years have 1-3 classes a day co-taught by an ESL andcontent teacher. If assessments of their reading determine that they are significantly below grade level, thesestudents are enrolled in a Read 180 program after school twice a week. d. Depending on their level, long-term ELLs have 1-3 classes a day co-taught by an ESL and content teacher. Ifassessments of their reading determine that they are significantly below grade level, these students are enrolledin a Read 180 program after school twice a week. 2018-19 SCEP-P 62  e. Former ELLs, who have tested proficient in the last 1 to 2 years will be given the testing accommodations they werereceiving prior to testing proficient (extended time, use of glossaries). These accommodations will be madeavailable to them for classroom activities/assessments, as well as state exams including the Regents. Thesestudents may also receive push-in support from an ELL teacher, as deemed appropriate by the two ESLteachers. This support will be based on baseline data, parent choice, and teacher recommendation. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers use several differentiation strategies in the classroom to ensure all ELL-SWDs needs are met. Thesestrategies include: reviewing, repetition, modeling, descriptions, visuals, hands on activities, grouping, vocabulary,relevant content, understanding and embracing students&#39; culture, materials, dictionaries, Spanish text/translatedtext, and audio when available. Several of these strategies have been, and will be, taught in PDs throughout theyear by our ESL teachers. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ELL students who are also identified as having special needs receive push-in services co-teaching services during theschool day. Some of these students may also attend after school where they receive academic interventions andadditional support from an ESL teacher. Content area teachers meet with ESL teachers once a week duringcommon planning time to discuss ELLs and come up with strategies to use in the classroom to support theirlearning. The ESL teachers also collaborate with the Special Education teachers to ensure they are workingtowards the goals on the student’s IEP. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Extended day program: Our extended day program meets after school during 9th period. Currently, all BeginnerELLs take part in 50 minutes of additional support per day during this time, focusing on writing and literacy instructionas well as strengthening listening and speaking skills. During the school day: We utilize a push-in and co-teaching model across all grades to provide ELL services duringthe school day. Two of our ESL teachers push into content area classes and co-teach with the general educationteacher at least two periods a day. Our ELLs who have IEPs also receive additional push-in support during theiradvisory period. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Some new programs and improvements we are considering for the upcoming year include: planning additional PDs onstrategies to support ELLs in the classroom, additional translation services, providing activities for ELLs before theyenter the school and during their stay, coming up with a more detailed plan for long term and former ELLs, increasingthe number of native language evaluations we offer, and researching the purchase of additional materials that willsupport our ELLs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students in each grade receive services in a general education setting with heterogeneous classes. All students,including ELLs, are encouraged to attend the many lunchtime and after school activities we offer, such as Art Club,Student Government, Youth Service Club, Youth Court, Dance Club, Technology Club, Chess Club, Book Club,LGBTS group, Internships, Senior Committee, etc. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials that are used to support ELLs in the content areas include: smart boards, laptops, translatedversions of texts, audio books, interactive workbooks and books. In addition some of our ELLs are scheduled for ourReading Interventions class and utilize that program to work on their reading comprehension and literacy skills. 2018-19 SCEP-P 63  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We currently offer ESL as our only program model. In this program, native language support is delivered in thefollowing ways: students are given content texts and assessments in English and their native language whenavailable, content-specific glossaries, adapted texts with key words highlighted and provided in the native language,translations of key parts of the lesson (Do Now, Objective, Focus Question). 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The required services support and correspond to our ELLs' ages and grade levels. Our ESL teachers and contentarea teachers meet to plan their lessons during scheduled weekly common planning times to ensure that strategies,activities, and assessments are appropriate to each student. The ESL teachers also notify administration if there arematerials or resources that are needed to better support our ELL population. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Our school coordinates efforts with other schools in the building each year, based on need. We collaborate on NYSESLAT testing, as well as shared classes that are offered after school, on Saturdays, and in the summer. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school holds orientation for all new students during the summer. We explain the programs offered and answerany questions that ELLs and parents may have. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Currently we offer Spanish as an elective offered to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Professional development is provided by school staff, school consultants, other support organizations during commonplanning time, weekly grade and department meetings, and on-site PD sessions. Off-site professional developmentopportunities are also offered to teachers when applicable. Our school is structured into instructional teams and all teachers have common planning as their circular six assignments. ELL teachers meet with general educationteachers to infuse strategies that will support ELL students into daily instruction through the workshop model,curriculum maps, and scope and sequence for each class. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include 2018-19 SCEP-P 64  how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. These minimum requirements are met as described above in question #1. Attendance sheets of all meetings, PDsessions, and workshops are maintained by the Principal. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In addition to mandated meetings and parent-teacher conferences, our school holds monthly parent-teachermeetings. Of these monthly meetings, at least one of them includes an agenda specifically for ELL students andparents. We invite all our ELL families and discuss with them the goals of our ELL program and our strategies forsupporting our ELL students. In addition, our ESL teachers meet with individual parents, or hold phone conferences ifthey are unable to make it to the school, to discuss their child&#39;s specific needs and progress. Our parent coordinator ispresent to translate at all meetings and phone calls, as necessary. A translator is called, as needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our ELL parents are involved in various school events and activities. They attend monthly parent-teacher associationmeetings and workshops at the school on various topics of interest (based on parent survey and NYC School Surveyresults). These sessions present information on a variety of topics including citizenship, the rights of ELL parents andstudents, and academic interventions ELL parents can provide at home. We also focus on teaching parents about thetechnology resources they have available to them through the school in order to communicate with teachers as wellas check in on their children’s academic progress (through Skedula). In addition, ELL parents participate in other activities at the school throughout the year, such as Family nights and Honor Roll Ceremonies and Back to SchoolNight. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 65 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, David Liu, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2018-19 SCEP-P 66  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Gotham Collaborative High Scho School DBN: 08X452 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) David Liu Title Principal Annie Heller Assistant Principal Lisette Pacheco Parent Coordinator Niove Theoharides ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A Parent Magdalena Pena Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Kristy Lebron School Counselor Carron Staple N/A N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 6/26/18 N/A 6/26/18 N/A N/A N/A 6/26/18 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2018-19 SCEP-P 67  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08x452 School Name: GothamCollaborative High School Superintendent: Carron Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lisette Pacheco Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Incoming student data is monitored to identify families who may need translation and interpretation services. The main office has posted the required multi-language notices to inform families that language translation and interpretation services are available. We use the Home Language surveys to monitor languages spoken at the homes of our students. Home language survey data suggest that many of our families speak Spanish and Bengali at home. Many members of our office staff, as well as our Parent Coordinator, are fluent in Spanish. Two of our Paraprofessionals speak Bengali. Translation services are offered to the families of our students who speak languages we do not have a staff translator for. All communication with homes is translated into Spanish, and Bengali and Arabic (when possible). All intake documents (i.e. emergency blue cards), as well as communication that is mailed home (i.e. monthly newsletters), are translated as well. 2018-19 SCEP-P 68  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Bengali Arabic French 537 215 19 4 3 American Sign Language 1 Balante Mandinka (aka Mandingo) Soninke Ukrainian Vietnamese 1 1 5 2 1 68.06 27.25 2.41 0.51 0.38 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.63 0.25 0.13 530 221 19 4 3 1 1 1 5 2 1 67.26 28.05 2.41 0.51 0.38 0.13 0.13 0.13 0.63 0.25 0.13 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish 2018-19 SCEP-P 69  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Once a month, or at least Two weeks before the date of the event Spanish and Bengali translations will be completed by staff members. As needed throughout the school year As needed throughout the school year Spanish and Bengali translations will be completed by staff members. Spanish and Bengali translations will be completed by staff members. Spanish and Bengali translations will be completed by staff members. Announcements and monthly newsletters for important meeting dates (Back to School Night, PTA meetings, Parent conferences, etc.) Intake documents (i.e. emergency blue cards) Letters of concern about students’ academic performance and behavior Field trip permission slips As needed throughout the school year 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? We have an annual Back to School night every September, a fall Parent Conference day, a Spring Parent Conference day, and a Spring Family Night in May. Parent Teacher Conferences four times a year (September, November, March, May) The school has staff that speak Spanish and Bengali. DOE Interpretation services will be contacted for other languages. In addition, we hold monthly PTA meetings and monthly SLT meetings. Monthly SLT/PTA meetings Teachers make regular phone calls to parents as part of their parent outreach time, in addition to the regular outreach by our Parent Coordinator, The Attendance Teacher, Social Workers, School Counselors, Deans, and teachers reach out to families in order to communicate about school events, Special Events The school has staff that speak Spanish and Bengali. DOE Interpretation services will be contacted for other languages. The school has staff that speak Spanish and Bengali. DOE Interpretation services will be contacted for other languages. 2018-19 SCEP-P 70  individual student issues, academic progress, attendance, etc. We also hold various Parent Workshops throughout the year. Special Events The school has staff that speak Spanish and Bengali. DOE Interpretation services will be contacted for other languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. The school has staff that speak English and Bengali. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. The regulation is shared with all staff members during Chancellor Professional Development day meetings. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is a directive on the responsibility that our school system is committed to for the opportunity of equal access to all rights, opportunity, information, and participation of LEP parents in our school. A parent will never be denied access to opportunities afforded their families, or to children enrolled at our school. As a result of these regulations, we have developed systems that will meet the needs of parents of ELLs who speak the predominant second language, Spanish, and less prevalent languages represented in our school, such as Arabic, Bengali, Sign Language, and French. Additionally, Item B of Section VII in the Chancellor's Regulations relates to the conspicuous posting of DOE covered languages for translation. This appears upon entry to the school near the Security Desk. The school's safety plan provides that parents who need to communicate with the school do so in their home language. This is determined via the Parents Preferred Language Form, which is available as part of the Family Resources offered through the Office of ELLs. All school based and consultant agencies will be utilized to this end, including community based organizations that will be instrumental in meeting the language needs of our parents. 2018-19 SCEP-P 71  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Surveys will be given and feedback solicited during monthly PTA meetings regarding the quality and availability of interpretation services and of key documents translated into home languages. 2018-19 SCEP-P 72 
