 11X468 School Name: PELHAM ACADEMY OF ACADEMICS AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT Principal: ANTHONY RIVERA     Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: PELHAM ACADEMY FOR ACADEMICS AND COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 321100010468 School Number (DBN): 11X468 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 6-8 School Address: 2441 WALLACE AVENUE, BRONX, NY 10467 ARIVERA11@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Phone Number: 718-881-3136 Fax: 718-881-3413 School Contact Person: ANTHONY RIVERA Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: ANTHONY RIVERA Katrina Holmes Parents’ Association President: VACANT SLT Chairperson: Jocelyn Vargas Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: N/A N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 11 Superintendent: Meisha Ross-Porter Superintendent’s Office Address: 2750 THROOP AVENUE, BRONX, NY, 10469 Superintendent’s Email Address: MRoss@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Phone Number: 7185192620 Fax: 718-519-2626 Field Support Center (FSC) FSC: BRONX Executive Director: JOSE RUIZ Executive Director’s Office Address: BRONX FSC Executive Director’s Email Address: JRUIZ2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Phone Number: 917-608-0230 Fax: N/A   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) ANTHONY RIVERA Katrina Holmes JacquelinePeterson VACANT N/A N/A Mona Parkinson JOCELYN VARGAS Brenda Castano *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Teacher Member/ GUIDANCE COUNSELOR Member/ TEACHER   Name Naxhije Kovacevic VACANT N/A Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ PARENT Member/ PARENT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At Pelham Academy, our vision is to establish proficiency, character and community among our students. Our mission is to engage all learners in experiences based on need and choice so that, together, we are accountable for, and inquisitive about, our journey to prepare tomorrow's leaders to be productive members of their community. Characterized by self-confidence and their ability to recover from the unexpected our students graduate prepared to compete at the next level.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. To ensure that instructional time is being used efficiently and effectively, teachers in each of the 4 major disciplines are programmed for uninterrupted blocks of time where they gather as professional learning teams to engage in the inquiry process. Their time is spent analyzing student performance data, analyzing student work, unit planning and lesson planning all guided by a process of goal setting and progress monitoring. Our ongoing partnership with Teaching Matters has factored into the ongoing success of our teacher teams and provided quality support in developing the capacity of teachers as leaders. In addition to content team inquiry, our grade teams are engaged in ongoing inquiry around a central goal. Over the past three years, our grade teams focused in our lowest progressing third, assessment and feedback and most recently on questioning and discussion techniques to guide our inquiry work. For the 2018-19 school year our grade teams will focus on establishing and maintaining strong relationships with all students (with a specific focus on our most vulnerable populations i.e. ENL, SWD, previously retained, etc.) that will drive action planning and execution in and outside of the classroom. By understanding who our students are, we can better understand who we have to be in order to adequately meet their needs. Over the past 5 years, our school has experimented with formal teacher leadership roles anchored in our partnership with the Office of Teacher Quality while piloting initiatives through the Teacher Incentive Fund. As we do every year, an in depth reflection at the end of the year was conducted to assess the performance of that initiative and we have determined that formal TL structures as currently defined by the DOE/UFT do not meet the needs of our school and learning community. This school year, we will move away from identifying one or two teacher leaders, instead, creating multiple opportunities for teachers to lead in different capacities throughout the school. While our primary focus is to accelerate the academic gains of all students, we realize that children at this stage in life are experiencing a significant and oftentimes tumultuous transition into adolescence. To support them during this transition, we have reaffirmed our commitment to embedding social/emotional development initiatives into our action plan for the year. As a result, our students are prepared to assume leadership roles as they are presented with the opportunity to serve as ambassadors of their school in different venues. As we continue to develop and refine our Advisory program, we will create a House structure that teams students, vertically and create more intimate opportunities for students to connect with their Advisors and team leaders to develop structures that meet the needs of smaller groups of students. A school council will be created with representatives from ALL classes and 1 House representative (4 total) will be elected to serve on our SLT. Our partnership with The Bronx House, through the DYCD's SONYC initiative has afforded one third of our student body with access to afterschool programming from 2:30-5:30pm every day of the week. In addition to our SONYC offerings, students engage in a variety of recreational, leadership, character development opportunities that are a structured part of our own afterschool programming. On average more than half of our students participate in afterschool programming every year. As the program transitions to a new site director, we will work closely to ensure that their messaging, programming and training closely reflect our values so that the students experience after school resembles and serves as an extension of their experience during the school day. Our students come to understand the concept of community as they learn to work together, effectively, within and beyond the walls of our school. Our families have always and continue to play a crucial role in the success of all our children. We work to ensure that families continue to remain engaged in the critical yet complex tasks associated with supporting their development and progress. While family participation is, at times, impressive, it has not been consistent. Our objective is to create high quality experiences that engage all families which will require that we 0  concentrate our efforts on key activities as opposed to creating monthly opportunities that are not well attended. Parent engagement opportunities will be more intentional, each incorporating some celebration/acknowledgement, information/training, and opportunity to connect/network. We have a diverse student body represented by all shades, languages and abilities. We have special populations that are all unique and capable of achieving at high levels. Our job has and continues to be finding ways to afford ALL of our children with the supports they need to compete at the next level. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. We continue building upon our efforts at supporting all students by ensuring a well balanced, rigorous and relevant curriculum is implemented strategically so that lower performing, higher performing, ELL's and SWD's are met where they are and effectively supported in their learning. We are working to ensure that our command of student performance data translates into strategic and accurate scaffolds and modifications to curriculum and instruction (across contents but particularly in Math) so that all learners continue progressing at high levels. The greater our command of our students as learners, the greater our capacity to support them through strategic planning and execution of appropriately rigorous learning activities. Our aim must be to know our kids well so that we can use that diagnosis to implement only those instructional supports that can leverage the greatest gains. Specifically, our lowest performing students demonstrate deficiencies in fundamental standards that manifests in significant struggles decoding and comprehending text near grade level and basic operations and math facts that render more complex math problems out of reach. For those students, opportunities for remediation through AIS and ongoing in class supports are a basic requirement. For our lowest progressing students, our capacity to identify students highest leverage next steps are crucial for their continued development. High level data analysis that drives unit and lesson planning will be supported in order to help drive achievement in this particular sub-group. For our SWD's, ensuring that high quality IEP's are being drafted and adhered to is critical to their success. Ensuring that ALL teachers have a functional understanding of each students IEP and how those IEP's should drive modifications to teaching and learning is critical in this regard. Our ENL students will benefit from high quality support across contents. Teachers will incorporate language acquisition strategies into their unit and lesson plans so that this particular subgroup is supported consistently across contents. ENL students will benefit from working in heterogeneous groups and have the opportunity to practice all modalities of language across classes. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Collaborative Teachers- As a school we have continued to develop the systems and structures that nurture teacher collaboration across the school. We have identified the structures and supports to make teacher collaboration a reality, a priority and a necessity. So much of our work is grounded in consistent communication and a commitment to the students, the work and one another, that we all have a vested interest in succeeding within our classrooms and as a school. Our grade team inquiry has evolved over the past three years to include video intervisitations, walkthroughs and collaborative analysis of student work in a way that reveals the impactful practices across contents and grades. This past year, we identified Grade Team Facilitators who drove the work of their individual grade teams and liaised with Leadership to guide and adjust the work. For the 18-19 school year, we will continue to evolve that work so that they have the time and structures to deepen their understanding of the kids they teach and calibrate 1  their approach to supporting their needs. The individual grade teams will be supported by the work of our first ever Pupil Personnel Team who will convene and make support recommendations for kids on a rolling basis. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X468 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 323 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 28 28 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 25 25 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 83.0% % Reduced Lunch 13.6% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 62.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 15.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 9.25 8% 32% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 44.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES YES NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO NO NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 34 34 93.2% 5.6% 21.4% 13.9% 7.4% 0.6% 2 28% 5.9 34.6% 62% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. According to the Framework for Great Schools, "A successful classroom requires a strong curriculum—aligned to the Common Core— that challenges students, scaffolds their experience, and is enlivened by teachers who are engaged with their craft. The curriculum must meet students where they are and customize inclusive, motivating instruction. Rigorous instruction aligns practice and content to Common Core strategies within and across grades." At Pelham Academy, we have made great strides in this particular element of the framework. Content teams work, consistently to align curriculum and instruction to address the demands of college and career readiness. Our journey began with the formal implementation of the CCLS through the adoption of curriculum resources aligned to the new standards. In 2014-15, we adopted Expeditionary Learning in ELA and CMP3 in Math. While tumultuous, our journey was one filled with wonderful opportunities to learn and grow as a school. Four years ago we, as a school, implemented these curriculum resources with integrity. We followed what was prescribed for a variety of reasons but most importantly, we had not established enough capacity around the common core to make well informed decisions about the most effective ways to develop children academically toward the new standard. With every lesson, every unit, every quarter and every year, we learned and continued to build our capacity around effective ways to teach to the standard. This increasing confidence in what we were doing, and more importantly why we were doing it, resulted in more autonomy around curricular decisions. As a school we began to supplement our common core aligned materials with a variety of resources including those that were teacher created. We built our capacity around understanding how college and career readiness was assessed and used this information to make strategic decisions around curriculum and instruction that has resulted in consistent gains. As a school, our most recent gains were reflective of the work that has and continues to take place in the school. After 4 years of working with and through Expeditionary Learning and CMP3, we made strategic and dramatic shifts in curriculum resources, adopting curriculum resources that more closely reflect the level of rigor represented in the standards. Our decision to adopt Collections (for ELA) and the Engage Modules from EngageNY, have provided us the opportunity to, again, prepare for the design, refinement and execution of a common core curriculum with one major difference. After a full year using Collections and the Engage Modules, we have reflected on our experiences with the resources and our own internal assessment of student achievement and have discovered opportunities to continue developing curriculum for the coming year. 4  Reflecting on ADVANCE platform data, our 17-18 School Quality Guide (specifically student and teacher survey responses aligned to Rigorous Instruction), the June Instructional Reports and DRP platform data we see a very clear pattern emerge. The development of literacy across contents is inconsistent and in some instances non-existent. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019 and resulting from clear, concise and relevant professional development, teachers will improve their capacity to strategically plan for (in their lesson plans) the delivery (as observed) of "direct, explicit comprehension instruction" across contents for all students resulting in a 20% increase in students demonstrating progress as measured by the EOY DRP. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Launching WORDGEN to support the aquisition of academic vocabulary across the school followed by a series of coaching cycles to aid in the implementation of said initiative. Professional Development series supporting 3 key high yield literacy strategies to be implemented across contents. 1. Reciprocal Teaching 2. Note Taking 3. Annotating -Teachers -Coaches -Mentors -Admin -Paras -Teachers -Coaches -Mentors -Admin -Paras Reciprocal Teaching 9/18 Note Taking 10/18 Annotating 10/18 Deep Data Dive to triangulate student achievement data and establish literacy goals and commitments across the school -Teachers 8/2018 Coaching cycles that highlight (among other things) the impact of literacy development in all contents. -Teachers 10/18 for every 6 weeks ending 6/19 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Launch 9/18 Coaching 10/18-5/19 -MSQI Coach -Teaching Matters Consultant -Administration -Content Coaches -Grade Team Facilitators -ELEVATE Consultant -Teaching Matters Consultant -Administration -Content Coaches -Grade Team Facilitators Data Specialist TM Consultants Admin -MSQI Coach -ELEVATE Consultant -Teaching Matters Consultant -Administration -Content Coaches -Grade Team Facilitators 6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning with our curriculum orientation night and continuing throughout the year, the school will communicate it's focus on development of literacy across contents providing monthly updates regarding key steps and progress toward our goals with families via our monthly newsletter. Literacy development training will be embedded into our parental engagement strategy for the year, providing support and training to families so they can better support their children. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. To achieve this goal, our grade team facilitators, instructional cabinet and consultant corp will collaborate before, during and after school to establish, develop and monitor the progress of the initiative. The human capital has already been identified and secured and all necessary resources will be ordered to support learning and implementation. A cross content team will be identified to serve as lab site hosts to their colleagues showcasing this work across grades and contents. Funding will be made available to these teachers to support the planning and execution of this work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress toward the implementation of action steps will be monitored closely during weekly instructional cabinet meetings where we will plan for execution of professional development and monitor the progress of teacher teams working toward specific outcomes. We will conduct quarterly reviews of teacher performance, specific to observations made from coaching cycles against student performance data to surface trends and provide a lens through which we can assess our impact in supporting these initiatives. By the end of the 2nd quarter, all teachers will implement the 3 components of our initiative with integrity and those teachers requiring most support will have begun their first coaching cycle . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Implementation will be measured through informal and formal observations aligned to our schools literacy goal and results from coaching cycles. Impact will be measured by student performance trends on the BOY-MOY DRP, Interim Assessment data and student grade outcomes. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Our expectations for student achievement are high. As noted in our most recent QR (2015) and subsequent PPO's, our expectations are communicated in a variety of ways, including but not limited to the fact that ALL students are provided access to and support with the same grade level curriculum in spite of their "status" (i.e. IEP, ELL, etc.) In order to achieve the levels of achievement that we have seen (most recently on the 2016 NYS Exams in ELA, Math & on the NYSESLAT) our teachers have to be skilled at helping their students respond to a fairly significant cognitive lift. Some of these students are 1+ grade levels behind in ELA and/or Math, have learning disabilities and/or are English Language Learners, not to mention the many "everyday" obstacles of growing and developing in an urban environment. While the work begins with a target (which we have already established), adequate support structures must be strategically planned and deployed if we are to maximize learning for our most vulnerable learners. A review of our most recent School Quality Guide data suggests that in class culture requires well deserved time and attention. The culture of a school can be described by the "feeling" one gets as he/she walks through the door of the school and classes. Survey results from teachers and students reveal that the "feeling" resulting from in class culture is not one that can be categorized as professional, supported, committed or effective. Students and teachers report that there are significant concerns related to compliance, behavior and inattentiveness. In addition, an alarming percentage of students reported that they are dissatisfied with the personal attention that they are receiving from their teachers in class. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Pelham Academy will have developed a House Structure that assigns every student into one of four Houses where students will have the opportunity, in intimate groups, to develop the inter and intra-personal soft skills necessary to work collaboratively, navigate challenging situations, add to the experience of their peers and make positive contributions to their community. This initiative will result in 20% decrease in Principal and Superintendent suspensions as measured by an analysis of OORS data and a 30% increase in the number of teachers who respond that students build on AND respect the ideas of their peers as measured by the Learning Environment Survey.. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 4 House leaders will be identified and participate in a series of professional development to launch the year 4 House Leaders TBD 8/18-9/18 -Admin -Grade Team Facilitators -Guidance -PPT Guidance -Brain Power Consultant Groups of at-risk disciplinary concerns that are identified on a rolling basis 10/18 to be reviewed and revised every 6 weeks thereafter House Leads 9/17-6/18 Advisors Students Parents Instructional Cabinet, guidance, PPT and PCT 9/18-6/18 PPT The development of AIS cycles that focus on social/emotional development that target at risk groups with or without IEP's Training on Brain Power classroom Professional development specific to emotional intelligence, cultural awareness, crisis de escalation and implementation of a successful advisory program. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning with our curriculum orientation night and continuing throughout the year, the school will communicate it's focus on development of our House model providing monthly updates regarding key steps and progress toward our goals with families via our monthly newsletter. Training on supporting the needs of all children will be embedded into our parental engagement strategy for the year, providing support and training to families so they can better support 9  their children. In addition, families of students will help their children's House gain participation points by engaging in school sponsored events. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. This goal requires the creation of time in student and teacher schedules to support these interactions on a consistent basis. We will use current staffing levels but modify teacher schedules to afford adequate time to support this initiative. In addition, a teacher team led by our guidance department will be created to develop a living Advisory curriculum that affords students the opportunity to engage in relevant and engaging learning opportunities that address some of the behaviors that result in negative school and classroom culture. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Weekly cabinet meetings with our Guidance department and dean will be used to review teacher anecdotals and OORS data. Quarterly reviews will result in considerations of adjustments to resources, programming and/or execution. By the end of the second quarter, we expect a 30% reduction in high level offenses when compared to the same reporting period from the year before. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will use our Instructional Cabinet running agenda and minutes to monitor progress on the action steps, OORS data to monitor student disciplinary measures leading to suspension and student survey (informal/in house) data to capture student perceptions on the quality of the classroom culture and discourse. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. in 2015-16, Collaborative Inquiry took on a whole new meaning at Pelham Academy. In addition to the strategic use of the OPW, we programmed time into the schedules of all teachers so that they had the opportunity to engage in collaborative inquiry. As a cabinet, we looked at student growth percentiles and decided to use our lowest progressing students as the subjects of our work (regardless of the class you taught, you had students that were not progressing at the rate of their peers). Twice a week grade teams met and engaged in the ATLAS protocol of analyzing student work followed by a video intervisitation protocol that allowed the grade teams to reflect on the modifications to the teaching that resulted from their work. While a significant lift to coordinate and generate buy-in, the process was an amazing success and played a critical role in our gains this year. At the end of the process, we reflected on our work and the team made a set of recommendations which included increasing the frequency of the work and reducing the size of the grade level teams to allow for more personal interactions. By June of 2017, most teachers had been the subject of two cycles of inquiry and most had engaged in at least one video intervisitation. During that same period, our school engaged an Instructional Focus Collaborative made up of 5 district 11 middle schools who came together in service of each schools instructional focus to provide host schools with an objective assessment of how that school's instructional focus had come to life. Each school was visited twice over the course of the year and provided with summary statements of the visits along with next steps. Resulting from our first instructional focus collaborative, our teacher teams continued building upon that work and introduced a classroom walkthrough tool to be used by grade teams to capture evidence of effective practices across the school (aligned with our instructional focus). The protocol was introduced as a component of the grade team inquiry and enhanced the overall experience by further aligning their work to our instructional focus and, specifically, the work being done by the IFC. Our Schoolwide Self-Reflection revealed that a greater focus on schoolwide instructional priorities would advance our efforts toward our goals. This past year, we launched our collaborative inquiry around CEP goal for 5a (Rigorous Instruction). Grade teams, led by a newly inducted grade team leader engaged in a minimum of 2 cycles of inquiry where they presented student work, implemented research based action strategies and participated in an intervisitation. We further developed this practice by inviting teachers to participate in calibration vusuts and/or classroom lab sites. The calibration visits were designed to help develop a teachers capacity to plan for instruction through a more evolved lens of the FFT. The Lab Site classrooms were designed to flip the Model Teacher structure upside down. As oppossed to naming one model teacher, we acknowledged that we all have something to share. We invited teachers to host and/or visit lab site classrooms where teachers showcased a strategy that they were proud of or that they were looking for assistance with delivering. The result was phenomenal in terms of participation and we will continue to grow that strategy this year. Part 2 – Annual Goal 1  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will have engaged in the collaborative inquiry process (no less than 2x each) aligned to our school's instructional focus as measured by a 20% increase in teachers rated Effective or better in component 4e in the Advance platform.. Artifacts of participation in the process (ATLAS protocol followed by intervisitations and implications for ongoing practice reflections) will be used to support MOTP ratings specific to 4e. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Assign all teachers to a specific grade team with whom they will engage in collaborative inquiry throughout the year All teachers 9/18 Identify grade team leaders who will coordinate the process for their respective grade teams. Instructional Cabinet 9/18 Peer Collaborative Teachers and Grade Team Leaders Instructional Cabinet, Instructional Focus Collaborative Revise the inquiry protocols incorporating feedback from last year Provide differentiated professional development to all teachers on the revised ATLAS protocol and intervisitation protocol Instruction 10/18 Instructional Cabinet Teacher Leaders, Grade Team Leaders, Teachers 9/18-3/19 Instructional Cabinet, grade team leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning with our curriculum orientation night and continuing throughout the year, the school will communicate it's focus on development of teacher collaboration structures by providing monthly updates regarding key steps and progress toward our goals with families via our monthly newsletter. Collaboration opportunities will be embedded into our parental engagement strategy for the year, providing the training and space for families to work with our teachers in classroom settings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Aside from the associated costs of our teacher leads and our work with the District 11 Instructional Focus Collaborative, the costs associated with implementation of this goal are the allotment of time for professional development and use of teacher professional periods to engage in this work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 3  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Grade team leaders will be assigned and liaise between the teams and administration. Meeting once a month, we will have structured opportunities to reflect on the process and identify needs of the team and/or individuals. In February and again in June we will coordinate a "Strategy Expo" so that teachers can share out what they have taken away from the collaborative inquiry , calibration and lab site process. At our mid-year checkpoint, every teacher will have engaged in the full process at least once and either a calibration visit or hosted a lab site. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Running agendas and artifacts of the process (ATLAS protocol followed by video intervisitations and implications for ongoing practice reflections) and artifacts resulting from our mid year and year end "Strategy Expo". An action strategy folder will be created on the Drive to provide the entire school with access to materials that can be used to incorporate strategies modeled. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Effective school leadership begins with what we model to our teachers as acceptable evidence of what it takes nurture the growth and development of those whom we are responsible for supporting. The better I am at anticipating the needs of a diverse staff and addressing those needs with high quality resources and experiences, the better my teachers will be at doing those same things for their students. This year, I will focus on my work as a coach and a builder, pushing my staff to achieve at high levels in and outside of the classroom while providing the supports appropriate to each individual staff member. Teachers have opportunities and autonomy but require the same level of support if we are going to succeed at the levels we are capable. That level of support must come from administration, coaches, consultants and support staff. When teachers do not have access to high quality supports, they feel underprepared and lack confidence. In reflecting on the impact of our Teacher Leader structures, it has become clear that our most vulnerable teachers are not experiencing the levels of support that they need. In addition, it has become clear that the process by prospective teacher leaders were identified was ineffective and eliminated many from contention. A mid-year review of teacher aspirations revealed that the overwhelming majority of teachers are interested in pursuing some leadership function within the school. This year, we are scaling back our formal structures of teacher leadership and investing in planning for and executing more effective support structures so that we become more effective at building teacher leaders and establish a blueprint for what teacher leader development can look like at Pelham. There will be multiple opportunities for teachers to assume leadership functions at the school. Our aim is to involve as many people in the functioning of the machine that is our school and create opportunities for teachers to be mutually accountable to the students, the school and one another. Teachers have not reported high levels of trust for one another and that will shift! Only 79% of teachers report that they are respected for having taken on additional leadership responsibilities. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 75% of all teachers (excluding first year teachers) will have taken on some leadership function at the school that has a direct impact on school culture, instruction, family and/or community relations as measured by a 20% increase in teachers rated effective or better in component 4e on the Advance platform. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Establishing a shared language around the roles, expectations and intent of teacher leadership Development of a scope and sequence to be used by each teacher lead to assist in the planning and execution of the activities related to each function All Staff 9/18-11/18 Administration Teacher Leads 8/18-11/18 Administration, TM Consultant Creation of support cycles to coincide with observation cycles that will be used to determine instructional support targets Teacher Leaders 9/18-10/19 Administration/ TM Consultant/ IFC Collaborative Consultant Bi-Weekly check-ins with teacher leaders to unpack the work, review goals, reflect on progress and identify opportunities for additional support 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Teacher Leaders, Admin All staff via respective subcommittees 9/17-6/18 Administration/ TM Consultant/ IFC Collaborative Consultant How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Beginning with our curriculum orientation night and continuing throughout the year, the school will communicate it's focus on development of distributive leadership by providing monthly updates regarding key steps and progress toward our goals with families via our monthly newsletter. Opportunities for families to take on leadership roles will be broadcast and embedded into our parental engagement strategy for the year, providing support and training to families so they can better support their children. The identification of class parents will help extend that distribution into the home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will utilize our consultant from Teaching Matters and our IFC consultant to help facilitate this work. Each leadership function will be aligned to a stipend to be spent down via per session hours to support the work of each initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Specific long-term targets will be established at the start of the school year and short-term targets will be generated at the start of the year (See action plan) and addressed during every support cycle. Weekly cabinet meetings will be used, in part, to review progress toward those goals and make modifications when necessary. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. An internal record of teacher participation, effectiveness at planning for and executing within the established confines of their particular leadership function and surveys of participant satisfaction will be collected and reflected upon quarterly and at the end of the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Family Engagement in the school remains inconsistent. While we saw a significant increase in the number of families who participated in the school survey process, (72%), family participation in other voluntary initiatives to improve student outcomes has been low (i.e. 35% participation in HS articulation, 3% participation in an anti-bullying workshop). While an overwhelming percentage of families indicate favorable perceptions of the school, teachers and the school's leader, engagement in functions that call for family participation remain inconsistent. We have 2 main functions during the school year (celebrations) that result in 300+ attendees, while participation in high school articulation workshops and bullying workshops were disappointingly low. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, we will have developed an improved structure for parent engagement and empowerment that is reflected by 4 major events that incorporate celebration, acknowledgement, training and opportunities for networking. Each of the 4 events will be scheduled quarterly just after interim assessments so that the school can use the gatherings as an opportunity to celebrate student progress in addition to each of the above mentioned components. Work toward this goal will result in a 15% increase in the number of families who respond to the learning environment survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  We will engage the parents of incoming 6 th graders earlier in the process, hosting our orientation in August and inviting those families to participate and run for positions in our upcoming Parents Association Votes. In collaboration with our SLT, our PA and School Council we will plan 4 major events that link celebration, information, learning opportunities and resources. These events will be scheduled quarterly and bring everyone together for a variety of purposes, including PA involvement. Each event will be chaired by one of the established Houses and house leaders that consists of at least one student and class parent. Each chair will be responsible for the coordination and execution of each event. A newsletter will be established by our student council and used as the primary mode of communication through which information will be shhared with stakeholders. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? New Families of 6 th graders entering in Fall 2018 All Families 8/18 Principal, PC, Guidance 6/2018-10/2018 Principal, AP, SLT, School Council, PA and PC All Families 9/2018-6/2019 AP, PC and School Council Student Council, Teachers, families 10/17-6/1810/2016-6/2017 Student Council, Principal If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SLT time, Title I parental involvement funds to support the advertisement, planning and execution of events geared toward increasing parental involvement, per session funding to support teacher involvement. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 9  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We have established quarterly benchmarks that will be used as opportunities to gauge the impact of our efforts. Family participation will be closely monitored and compared to benchmarks established from previous years data. At our mid year check, 120 families will have participated in at least 2 school sponsored events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PA & SLT Running agendas & sign in sheets at events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Lowest 33% when considering each of the following: NYS EXAMS, Interim Assessment Data, Benchmark Results, MOSL Performance Lowest 33% when considering each of the following: NYS EXAMS, Interim Assessment Data, Benchmark Results, MOSL Performance Lowest 33% when considering each of the following: NYS EXAMS, Interim Assessment Data, Benchmark Results, MOSL Performance Lowest 33% when considering each of the following: NYS EXAMS, Interim Assessment Data, Benchmark Results, MOSL Performance As needed based on teacher referrals, incident reports, family request for assistance or student initiated Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Pull out reinforcement of the standards taught, before/afterschool tutoring, Saturday Academy, Spring Break Boot Camp Pull out reinforcement of the standards taught, before/afterschool tutoring, Saturday Academy, Spring Break Boot Camp Tutoring Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group Small Group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, before or after school, Saturday’s, Spring Break During the school day, before or after school, Saturday’s, Spring Break Small Group Before or after school Pull out, tutoring Small group Before or after school Pull out Individual or small group Before, during or after school 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 4 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. For students in temporary housing, our school provides financial support in the form of school uniforms, supplies and transportation. In addition, those students are sponsored to all school field trips and/or events requiring financial input. While identified and monitored for at-risk behaviors, these students are not automatically scheduled for interventions unless they demonstrate a need (academic and/or emotional). Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. The recruitment of HQT’s is a vital component of the staffing here at Pelham Academy. A very rigorous hiring process never really ends as we recruit viable candidates all year round. The process is as follows: ● Resume screen ● Telephone interview ● Panel interview ● Demo ● Administrative interview ● Reference check We have found that when we deviate from the process, the results are representative of candidates that do not embody the spirit and energy of the type of educator that is successful at our school. Our aim is to provide our staff with everything they need to be effective. Whether that is materials, professional development or a place where they can collaborate freely and have the opportunity to explore creatively and develop professionally. This year, our professional development is focused around assessed need and teacher preference. By asking teachers about the areas where they want to develop, we are incorporating what we need with what they want and it has proven to be very successful. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Our PD focus for the year is strategically aligned to our ongoing integration of the CCLS, feedback from our PPO visits, the Danielson Framework for Teaching, student performance, Advance data and expressed need. A Staff Development Team was organized at the end of the school year that will play a critical role in establishing and executing a PD plan for the year accounts for all of these factors and helps monitor and respond to our changing needs on an ongoing basis. This year, we will focus on 1.2 and developing teacher pedagogy as a result of structured and consistent coaching from all members of the instructional team (including peers, coaches, administrators, students and consultants). In terms of teacher practice, the development of student discourse (Danielson 3b) will be threaded throughout our professional development plan over the course of the year. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources 4  Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Our teacher leadership corp will consist of 1 PCT and 1 Mentor. In addition, there will be a grade level team leader in each of the 6 th -8 th grades as well as department chairs. Decisions on all instructional policy come as a result of collaborative dialogue. Teacher teams come together to make MOSL recommendations, design unit exams, modify curriculum and design in-class formative assessments. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 5  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 286812 0 12,366 0 2,758458 X n/a X n/a X 5a, 5b, 5e n/a 6 n/a 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e, 6 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 6   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Pelham Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Pelham Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement 8 Parental Involvement and School Quality  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 9  ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) Pelham Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 0  ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; 1  ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Intervention In addition to existing additional services (including, but not limited to Academic Intervention provided during the school day, before and after school content tutoring and Saturday Academy), Pelham Academy will provide an after school program for ELLs that is supported by Title III funds. A thorough assessment of student developmental areas reveal the need for direct instructional support, exposure to technology, and English language development, in addition to programs and supports offered throughout the regular school day. Students will have the opportunity to participate in activities that incorporate and assist in the development of the four modalities: reading, writing, speaking, and listening in through the use of small group targeted instruction and blended learning software (i.e iReady). Furthermore, students will receive Saturday Academy, in which they will be able to extend their knowledge to rigorous ELL standards and work on enriching their understanding of the English Language. Newcomer ELL's have a very unique experience during their first year of instruction in a second language. Their capacity to engage the major contents is significantly limited by their limited English Proficiency. ELL's scheduled to take the ELA exam for the first time this year are in need of additional instructional supports to build comprehension and fluency and also demonstrate the capacity to understand and utilize academic vocabulary. Furthermore, SIFE are at a greater risk of becoming or continuing as long-term ELLs. Our Title III program will target newcomers and those who are scheduled to take the ELA exam for the very first time. Each group will consist of 15-20 students of all proficiency levels in grades 6-8. The After-school program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:40-4:10 PM, for a total of 20 sessions. One certified ENL teacher will team-teach with each of the other two content teachers for 45 minutes.. The Before-school will operate from Tuesday-Friday from 7:30-8:15 am beginning the week of October 9, 2018- April 15, 2019 for approximately 30 sessions. The service provider will be a certified ENL teacher Furthermore, our Saturday Academy program will continue for approximately 10 weeks, from 9:00 am-12:00 pm. One supervisor will be paid with other funding source to oversee the program before school (7:30am-8:00am), due to the fact that it is the only program running in the building at that time. The Supervisor in charge will be Mrs. Joanna Cartagena (Assistant Principal), I (Anthony Rivera) will supervise the program during those days/times that Mrs. Cartagena is unavailable. The number of teachers participating will be 3 (1 ENL certified & 2 content area (ELA) teachers). The students will be grouped into 2 smaller groups by NYSESLAT proficiency levels and the ESL instructor will rotate between each group for half of the instructional period and co-teach with the content teacher. During this program for ELLs, students will have access to technology and use MindPlay and iReady as well as small group opportunities to engage in instructional supports related to all modalities primarily through the incorporation of guided reading and writing. This program will support academic subjects and linguistic development that validates and respects the students’ right to actively participate in their own and each other’s academic subjects. Our Saturday Academy materials are extra enrichment materials that are typically not used during the weekly instruction. Most of these materials are iReady, Reading A-Z, Vocabulary A-Z, and Brain PoP. While the 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information projected costs to support the above mentioned programs exceeds our dedicated funding, the school will complement the costs of the programming using other funding sources. The maintenance of records will be checked in attendance that every teacher will complete at the start of the program, i.e Saturday Academy 8:00am, after school 2:25pm. Teacher will have a administrative created attendance sheet that will be filled out on Google Sheets. Parent communication will be translated in various languages to make sure parents are aware of program updates. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: To provide content specialists and special education instructors with training on the implementation of instructional strategies that have proved effective with the ENL population. Teachers to Receive Training: All teachers will receive training except for our certified ENL instructor who will be providing the professional development Schedule and Duration: The sessions will be delivered during our Monday afternoon faculty conference/professional development sessions which last approximately 80 minutes. The sessions are tentatively scheduled for October 15, November 19, and December 10. Topics to be covered include: Establishing an effective co-teaching model, vocabulary acquisition for ELL's, development of academic vocabulary. Providers: Yessi Jimenez, ENL Instructor/Coordinator, Jelbin DelaCruz, Consultant Rationale: Teacher/facilitators of computer based programs receive training on how to use the program with students, how to monitor progress, how to create and align units of study and how to use the data from the system to inform instructional targets. Teachers Receiving Training: Jennifer Stanton, ELA Instructor, Katrina Holmes & Mona Parkinson, Special Education Teachers (servicing ELL's with IEP's). Schedule For Training/Topics to be Covered/ Providers: On Saturday, October 6, 2018, all 3 teachers participating in the after school program will be provided with professional development to support the incorporation of both blended learning programs used to support their English Language Learners, to be followed up by coaching sessions at three undetermined dates through the end of the school year. ELL After School Program teachers will also receive training in the use of academic content-based materials to support the implementation of the after school programs. The additional training date is October 13, 2018 and two additional dates TBD. Rationale: To help develop the writing capacity of our ELL's, we have engaged the support of a writing consultant from the Collins Writing Program. With his help, teachers have identified gaps in student writing and have developed instructional targets to focus on over the course of the year. Teachers Receiving Training: All 5  Part C: Professional Development Schedule/ Duration: 16 days of dedicated support for teachers of ENL students has already been scheduled. Each day that he visits, he spends the entire day with our staff: observing, modeling and conferencing with teachers. He will spend an additional 4 days with us before the end of the school year. Those dates are to be determined. Topics to be covered: include determining strategic instructional targets for students in grades 6-8, explicit instruction of selected writing targets, meeting the expectations of the common core writing standards, conferencing, using the poetry reflection notebook, TBD. Maintenance of records such as attendance will be distributed at the beginning of the session, in which all teachers will sign in. Then, administration will input attendance at the end of the session. Providers: Jelbin DelaCruz, Writing Consultant, Teaching Matters Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rationale: Families of ELL's are at an inherent disadvantage when deciding how best to support their children. In response, Pelham Academy will offer a series of workshops intended to help families answer the question "How Can I Help My Child Succeed". Schedule and Duration: The workshops will be hosted during and after school, lasting anywhere from 30-90 minutes (depending on the topics covered, number of participants and needs of the families in attendance). Tentative dates for the workshops are: 9/24/18, 10/22/18, 11/19/18, 12/12/18, 1/14/19, 2/11/19 Determination of what topics will be covered on what days will be established as a result of a parent survey to be initiated by our parent coordinator and ENL instructor. Name of Providers: ENL instructor, Yessi Jimenez, Parent Coordinator, Renee Oehler, Bilingual Guidance Counselor, Jocelyn Vargas. Topics to be covered: Academic supports at home, supports and resources available in the community, understanding and preparing for college readiness and how that impacts ELL's, the High School Articulation process. All parent of ELLs will be invited, including parents of Title III participants. Parents will be notified via direct mail, backpacking of notice and telephone calls home. In addition, students will be offered the chance to win small incentives if their families attend. Parent communication will be translated in various languages to make sure parents are aware of program updates. All records such as attendance and agenda will be kept on file. 6 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Pelham Academy For Community Engagement Borough Bronx School Number 468 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Anthony Rivera Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yessi Jimenez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Meisha Ross Porter Assistant Principal Joanna Cartagena Coach type here School Counselor Joceyln Vargas Parent Gigi Istrofevic Parent Coordinator Renee Oelher Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 323 8 Total number of ELLs 90 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 27.86%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Assessment tools that are used at Pelham Academy included Fountus and Pinnel, Wilson Foundation's and teacher-created diagnostic assessments. These three assessment tools are the pinnacle of our assessment of ELLs. After using some of these assessment tools, students of Emerging and Transitioning are able to decode and have pacing in their reading (26 percent respectively). Students at this level are starting to use skills that they learned at the Emerging level to enhance their comprehension (57 percent respectively). Students of an Expanding level are able to do tasks that a commanding student would be able to do, at a slightly differentiated task (i.e, identify native speech patterns, obtain central ideas with support of citing evidence). The data also provides that students at an entering level may sometimes not hear or spell certain word blends that would not be related to their home language (32 percent respectively). This data allows the ENL teacher differentiate specific tasks to work on those critical areas. This data also allows for our school to push some of these differentiated tasks into content areas in a creative way. Math teachers will be able to help with understanding concepts, meanwhile in ELA, teachers will help support students understand how can they provide evidence to support those decisions (cross-content). 9  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Structures that are in place to support the efforts include daily assessments as well as weekly and bi-weekly assessments that are used to control input from students. Once teachers have collected enough data to support these efforts, teacher then place specific protocols that will help the student grow in the English Language. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? At Pelham Academy, evaluation is key to English Language Learner Progress. The key to evaluating student success is through approaching students holistically. To do this, students are evaluated on their Adequate Year Progress. This said, Pelham Academy identifies ELL students and their End of Year Scores of the Previous Academic Year. Once ELLs have been identified to be performing at grade level or below level, students are then differentiated to their proper setting. ELL students are then periodically assessed through out their course work and NYS Approved Assessments. These assessments include MOSL, NYC Periodic of ELLs Assessment, and internal periodic assessments to track student progress. With all of this said, all quantitative data is then assessed by the ENL Coordinator, in conjunction with content teachers to better support the needs of ELLs. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Students are enrolled into Rti programs, Saturday Academy, after school program, AIS, as well as extra periods in English Language development, to support the needs of the student, depending on their levels. Students may receive all or some.of the services based on what the summative data provides to the intervention specialist at Pelham Academy. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses the data to create a RTI and AIS system. According to the 2015-2016 ELL Policy and Reference Guide for each English language learner who scores below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment, the school must determine the additional support services to provide the student, taking into consideration evidence such as the following: Number of years of instruction in a bilingual education or English as a new language program English and home language literacy, Content area and socio-emotional support needs of students with inconsistent/interrupted formal education (SIFE) English and home language literacy needs of long-term ELLs Results on the annual English language proficiency assessment exam Bilingual education or English as a second language teacher recommendation , Content area teacher recommendation 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After analyzing data provided by the AMAO tool, and data reports from the City of New York, during the school year 2015-2016 and 2017-2018 School years, about 54 percent of the students who took the NYSESLAT tested as Proficient. The data also revealed that of students in the lowest third, 63 percent of students move up at least one level (Entering-Transitioning, Transitioning-Expanding, Expanding-Commanding). Of Latino decent, 71 percent of our student progressed 2 levels. Students who transitioned out of ENL Services also averaged at lease a 2.4 in NYS ELA and 2.3 in NYS Math. After Analyzing NYSITELL information during the 2014-2015 year, 80 percent of our students tested as Entering, meanwhile, 20 percent of our students were Commanding of the English Language. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ESL teacher will collaborate with the Principal and intervention specialists to pinpoint specific trends that may or may not occur and will plan in occurrence to the findings presented above. Part IV: ELL Programming 0  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Instruction for students at Pelham Academy is a Freestanding ENL Program. Students are heterogeneously grouped into their grade specific content classes. ENL students in each grade are given 3 integrated ENL Periods per week 2 of stand alone ENL instruction equating to 400 instructional minutes per student per week. During the ENL Periods, students are grouped together depending of proficiency levels. Beginner/Entering students receive at least a total of 200 Integrated ENL instruction and 200 minutes of standalone ENL minutes. Emerging and Transitioning students receive a total of 200 integrated ENL minutes and a total of 200 standalone minutes. Expanding and Proficient students receive a total of 180 integrated ELA/ENL minutes. ENL students travel together heterogeneously by grade level for integrated instruction. During standalone ENL instruction, students are graded and receive instruction in a heterogeneous setting. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Pelham Academy ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes are provided according to ENL Proficiency Standards. During ENL instruction, students are delivered minutes based on proficiency level. Depending on their level, students will receive between 150-200 minutes of ENL instruction. All students receive integrated ELA/ENL instruction. During this time, students will receive between 150-200 minutes of integrated instruction. Being that Pelham Academy uses a Freestanding Program, 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Core content is delivered to all students in a heterogeneous classroom. During the ENL/ELA Periods, students will work with an ENL Teacher on a modified version of Expeditionary Learning. Students will be taught in English, with the student flexibility to use their Native Language for further understanding of tasks. Students will work with on different modules through out the year to become grade level proficient. Attached to Expeditionary Learning, the ENL Teacher will provide attached modifications to promote ELL needs. Such differentiated tasks are; Listening Passages, Table Talk, Writing Exercises, Reading Comprehension and Reading Skill Work. Building these types of differentiated activities and integrating Expeditionary Learning will allow for students to foster a second language as well as meet the needs of the Common Core Learning Standards. During ENL instructional Pull-Out Periods, Students will work with the teacher to practice skills that further need developing. This skill based approach class will allow for students to work on the four modalities in ELL comprehension. Some topics that will be covered in this class are Syntax, Morphology, Pragmatics, Listening Comprehension, Vocabulary Building, and Reading Skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELL’s are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year through the basis of home language surveys, reading/writing informal assessments and the strong use of a second language during class activities. Students are also given a periodic assessment that determines if there has been any growth in the primary language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 1  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Students of and ENL program are differentiated in multiple ways. Students of many grade levels and proficiency levels work differently in order to learn specific grade level work. SIFE students are given extra learning periods though out the week. Through an RTi System that is in place, the ENL teacher works with the SIFE student to provide intensive services that a SIFE student may need. During class instruction, a SIFE student will be given differentiated work that is based on the same topic, but at a different functioning level as per the student needs. A Newcomer at any time of the year receives the same RTi System that a SIFE student may receive. This student will be given intensive study of the English language, while continuing to foster their native language. Students that are Newcomers will also be given differentiated work in their content specific classes. Newcomers would receive translated dictionaries, translated instructions, and a high level functioning group of Advanced Students who will help the Newcomer transition into their new setting. Differentiation for a Developing ELL is different from a SIFE and Newcomer students. Developing ELLs now need to continue their growth in learning English as their next language as well as enhance their native language. Students that are developing will continue to get intensive study during their Pull-Out push/Push-In Periods, students will work to achieve grade specific tasks in a more inclusive language orientation focusing around English. Students will be give the proper scaffolding to ensure that students perform well on grade specific tasks. Long Term ELLs will also be differentiated when it comes to content specific learning targets. Long Term ELLs will work closely with the ENL Teacher to work on specific learning targets that are holding them back from understanding the English Language. The ENL teacher will devise tasks that are a blend of Expanding and Commanding Tasks in order to have students achieve greater success in the English Language. Former ELLs will be given 90 minutes of instruction a week to practice skills that they may still need to work on. This includes syntactical errors, reading comprehension, and listening enrichment. Former ELLs will continue to get ENL differentiated instruction depending on their capabilities of understanding content specific tasks. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Some instructional strategies and grade-level materials that teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas are are Fountas and Pinnell assessments and learning targets, Reading A-Z, Vocabulary learning, Ready, iReady, and other Internet based learning projects. Grade level materials that are used for an ELL-SWD is Expeditionary Learning and CMP3. All of these strategies put a student with a learning disability on the fast track to learning the English Language. To ensure that all students who hold an IEP and are ELLs are receiving all mandated service time, the ENL Coordinator in conjunction with the IEP Teacher and Special Education Coordinator meet to devise a plan and schedule times for the student to receive all their services. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students with Disabilities and are of ELL status are given time during the day to practice their skills they learned. They are given an ENL Pull-Out and an AIS period in order to support the students. Students with specific IEPs that require Resource room also receive extra time during the week to focus in on how students can learn specific content strategies and skills. Giving this time a week to a student of ELL status with an IEP allows for the student to learn a skill thoroughly through out the week. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Pelham Academy’s targeted intervention programs for ELL’s in ELA, Math, and other core content areas are Academic Intervention Services that is used through out the week. During this week, students are pulled out for AIS services and normally targets the bottom third quartile in a class set. The ELL groups that are targeted in this set are normally Emerging and Transitioning Groups. Along with AIS services, students also receive before and after school services throughout the year. This service allows the bottom third quartile to work on skills that are needed through out the year. During the summer, students 2  of the same targeted group also are allowed to participate in an English Language Institute program. This allows students to work on skills that they have learned the previous year, as well as be exposed to new skills that will be needed for the upcoming year. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? New this year at Pelham Academy will be the addition of an integrated ENL-ELA class that will work with students who have tested out on the basis of the NYSESLAT and/or NYS ELA Exam. This program will be used to work on supporting skills that they have learned in their core class, as well as give enrichment course work. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No service will be discontinued this year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are given equal opportunity towards any after school program that is offered in Pelham Academy. About 75 percent of the ELLs in Pelham Academy are a part of after school programs. These programs range from Academic Intervention to Sports & Arts. After school supplemental services that are offered at Pelham Academy are ELA, Math, and Science after school sessions. There is also an ELL after school session. During the content after school sessions, teachers work with students on an extension of what they learned that day. Students are also given the ability to work on old skills that they still need to work on. During the ELL after school program, students work on the four modalities in English Language Acquisition. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials that are used in classrooms to support ELLs are, Fontis & Pinnel, Ready & iReady, Reading A-Z, Ratz-Kids, and translated reading and writing texts for lower leveled students. These all are supplementary materials that are used to help all levels of ELLs in our ENL Program. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Pelham Academy promotes the use of Home Language within the classroom and outside. Students are given the ability to work in their home language if necessary to find solutions to problems, express their ideas, and use their home language to communicate to others. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Pelham Academy ensures all required services/resources support correspond to ELL age and grade level needs. Students in the ENL program work with their grade levels through out the day. They are also able to interact with lower and upper grades when it comes to ENL instruction. Students have access to all resources on the web and are given resources in hand. Students have the ability, no matter what age group or grade level to see their teachers if needed before, during, and after school. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instructional materials that are used in classrooms to support ELLs are, Fontis & Pinnel, Ready & iReady, Reading A-Z, Ratz-Kids, and translated reading and writing texts for lower leveled students. These all are supplementary materials that are used to help all levels of ELLs in our ENL Program. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Newly enrolled ELLs are given the chance before the beginning of the school year to join the English Language Institute that is offered in July. During this time, students are given an individualized plan of action. During this time, the ENL teacher will work with the student to create activities that suit their needs. During this time, the school counselor will work with the student once a week to help with any questions and concerns they may have. The parent coordinator of Pelham Academy also sets up appointments with Parent/Guardians to discuss action plans for their students needs for the up coming school year. 3  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Pelham Academy does not offer language elective programs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Pelham Academy’s professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school is devised into 2 sections. The first section involves the a monthly PLT dedicated to ENL instruction. During this time, teachers will receive valuable instruction on student needs and activities that they could use with ELLs. The ENL teacher will also promote turnkey professional development to involve all teachers in learning different professional needs for ELL students. The ENL teacher will also go on monthly professional development to learn new cutting edge methodologies for ENL instruction. ELL professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs through out the year as they try to engage in the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL teachers are sent on monthly professional development to enrich their practice. ENL teachers are also given monthly PLT time to meet with a coach on some continuous practices that ENL teachers should focus on. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. ENL Teachers work with the Guidance Counselors of schools to help transitioning middle school students. ENL Teachers and Guidance Counselors work to help guide students to a school that would best fit them. Depending on their status as an ELL or Former ELL, students are given the freedom to choose their destination. Teachers are also familiar with the schools of the district and help students try to make the best decision possible. During Pelham Academy’s weekly Professional development, agendas and attendance is taken. Once a month, teachers are given an ELL Professional Development. The ENL teachers at Pelham Academy receive 75% of Professional Development Hours towards learning new ELL methodologies. They are sent out on trainings and seminars. ENL Coordinator will also turn key specific Professional Developments. Records on Professional Development after each sessions. Attendance is taken during each session. Agendas are presented as to what structure each session entails. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 4  With the help of the Parent Coordinator and Principal, the ENL Teacher sets up meetings to weekly during Parent Engagement Times. During this time, parents are discussed on their language development process, their results on latest diagnostic assessments, and their overall language development within the content areas. There is always a translator on standby to support the ENL teacher if they don’t speak the same language. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. ELL parent involvement in Pelham Academy is present in the School Parent Leadership Team. There are two parents that represent the ELL community during the meetings. They are elected every year at the beginning of the school year. ELL parents also participate in Teacher/Parent Meetings and communicate concerns and suggestions that they might have for ELL activities and other student activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Anthony Rivera, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Pelham Academy School DBN: 468 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Anthony Rivera Title Principal Joanna Cartagena Assistant Principal Renee Oelher Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Katrina Holmes Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Jocelyn Vargas School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 468 School Name: Pelham Academy Superintendent: ROSS PORTER The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training conducted by The LAC was involved in the the Field Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No development of this plan? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Pelham Academy uses data to capture language preferences of ELL parents, and parents whose preferred language is other than English. During initial meeting with all incoming parents, parents are given a form to fill out as to what preference they have for written documentation. Along with that, the Home Language Identification Survey is used to assess parent needs. The ENL/Language Access Coordinator also identifies parents who speak a different language through the ATS system. At the beginning of the school year, the Parent Coordinator also identifies parents who have a preference of another language for written materials, during ‘Back to School Night.’ Parents have the opportunity to identify themselves as native speakers of another languages and can submit their approvals to receive information in another language. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 8  Language Albanian, Arabic, French, Greek, Spanish, Urdu Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Back to School Night, Welcome Letters, Student Handbook, Monthly Newsletters, Monthly/Weekly Calendars, Parent-Teacher Conference Announcements, Spirit Week, Weekly Announcements, After-School Program Information, New York State Testing Dates, General Overview of Student Curriculum, letters from the school leadership team, Progress Reports, etc. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 9  Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? • Face-to-Face Meetings include Back to School Night, Curriculum Night, Student Lead Conferences, Parent-Teacher Conferences, ENL-Parent Meetings, IEP-Meetings. • Teachers and guidance counselors use weekly Parent Engagement hours to meet with parents/guardians on student growth and needs. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Fulfillment of Parent Notification letters and requirements for translation and interpretation services, as per Section VII of the Chancellor’s Regulations will be done in a timely fashion, allowing for all translations to be done in accordance to the material at hand. All documents that will be in need of translation will be identified by the ENL/LAC Teacher as well as by the Principal, Assistant Principal, School Secretary, and Parent Coordinator. Teachers who would like letters or documents translated, will submit those letters and/or documents to the ENL/LAC coordinator a week before distribution. The interpretation services for any languages will also be requested in a timely fashion. Teachers and other staff that will need translation services must contact the ENL/LAC Teacher a week before. Pelham Academy will have the Welcome Poster available for all parents. The Parents’ Bill of Rights and Language Access Guide will be give out to parents during back to school night, or sent home. All parents that will be requesting translated services will also receive a Language ID Guide during Back to school night as well as sent home. 0  Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Pelham Academy will use Parent Surveys through out the school year to assess the quality of available services. During Parent-Teacher Conferences, parents will have the ability to submit surveys online in school. Using the feedback, Pelham Academy will work on how can we better our services for Parents, and what suggestion they might have for future and/or upcoming services. 1 
