 75X469 School Name: P469X - THE BRONX SCHOOL FOR CONTINUOUS LEARNERS Principal: JANINE TUBIOLO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Bronx School for Continuous Learners 1156789301 K-8 3177 Webster Avenue, Bronx NY 10467 School Number (DBN): 75X469 718-696-6440 Phone Number: 718-696-6541 Fax: Janine Tubiolo jtubiolo@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Janine Tubiolo Vilma Sanchez Patricia Swift T.B.D. N/A N/A N/A N/A Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 First Avenue klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1600 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Bronx Borough Field Office FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx NY 10462 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Janine Tubiolo Vilma Sanchez Sugeiry Hernandez CristianGarcia n/a n/a n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Christina Kharem Danielle Shapiro-Nussen Annette Velez Member/Teacher Member/Teacher Member/Teacher   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Gladys Manosalvas Member/ School Psychologist Marcia Pitt Madelyne Rivera Moore Shiovan Maysonet Jose Castro T.B.D./New Election Member/Assistant Principal Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our P469X MIssion Statement: Section 4: CEP Overview P469X The Bronx School for Continuous Learners (75X469) is an inclusive, collaborative Bronx District 75 school community where we continuously celebrate multilingualism and social emotional wellness in productive , positive learning environments where children and families become part of our family. Every student in Grades K through 8 is   engaged in both high quality standards and skills-based learning activities where we acknowledge and celebrate that students learn best in different ways and at different rates, making learning authentic. Our P469X Active School Vision: "Leading and Educating By Knowing, Doing and Being!" Our P469X School and Student Mantra:, We are P469X "L.E.A.D."ers:, drives both our school wide PBIS and our team building: Listen to Learn Engage in Safety, Always Be Respectful, Do the Right Thing! Core Values that Make Every Team Member a "469 L.E.A.D.er" are:  Leadership centered in distributive, collaborative structures promoting stakeholder leadership and capacity building;  Embracing the importance of individualized needs of every student while providing age/grade appropriate learning experiences within and across each grade band;  Advocacy for the abilities of all, celebrating incremental achievement and success;  Dedicated to our beliefs that our students will thrive in school communities that are diverse and inclusive, when ready for less intensive school programs; Dedicated to working with our families, co-located schools and neighboring agencies and communities, collaborating and integrating a variety of opportunities for students, families and staff. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Founded in 2014, P469X - The Bronx School for Continuous Learners, is an inclusive, collaborative Bronx District 75 school community for children with autism, intellectual disabilities and other emotional and health needs in self-contained special education, Bilingual Spanish self-contained special education and inclusive education learning environments in Grades K - 8. In 2018-2019, P469X is entering their milestone year, our five year anniversary as an ever-growing school community! A large part of what makes our school so successful with our families, students and team members is the fact that we are a school community where the talents and ideas of our stakeholders are embedded into our shared values, under one active school vision. This vision, centered around the common belief that all children are capable of learning at very high levels provided they are given the time, the access to the information and instruction, and the encouragement necessary to do so, supports our students in achieving a multitude of growth, annually. As such, P469X has done a great deal to align the organizational, academic and behavioral structures and expectations in our school to enhance our students' success across all domains of learning. Daily, we promote and model high expectations for teaching and learning, leading to the implementation of strong, collaborative teaching, learning and the development of, and for, the whole child in alignment with the domains of learning and developmental milestones on all levels of learning. Emphasis is placed on collaborative, purposeful professional learning and staff/team development opportunities, enhancing staff leadership opportunities, regardless of formal roles, within the school community and each of our sites. The Framework for Great Schools and District 75's vision, mission and annual goals serve as guides in terms of strengthening our foundation as a school community. Collaborations, partnerships and special initiatives being implemented within the P469X school community in 2018-2019 include, but are not limited to our : 0  1. Annual, School Wide L.R.E. Initiative 2. 3. Self-contained, Bilingual Spanish Dual Language and Transitional Bilingual special education classes in 6:1:1, Integrated Co-Teaching classes 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 classroom learning environments for students in Grades K-8; 4. Collaborative Inclusive School Community/Collaborative Practices Partnership with PS 77 Bedford Park Elementary School as part of the District 75/NYCDOE Chancellor's Initiative, 2016-2017, 2017-2018 and 2018-2019; 5. Selected as one of “The Chancellor’s 40 Initiative” to begin a Dual Language Program for the 2015-2016 school year , receiving a $25,000 Grant for implementation and a $15,000 Grant for expanding our Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) Classes 6. Recipient of 2017-2018 Project ProELL Planning Grant to initiate and expand on our Bilingual Special Education Programming. 7. P469X Principal's Promising Practices Collaborative Teams/Committees provide teacher-paraprofessional-related services therapists with opportunities to collaborate with school administration and instructional cabinet members in planning, preparation, and other student-achievement related areas throughout the course of the year. 8. ADDITIONS TBD BASED ON OUR SLT MEETING 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. . Our school is comprised of 348 students, and 100% of our students have individualized education plans (IEPs). Our students express themselves and communicate via preferred methods of communication that include both Lo-Tech and Hi-Tech assistive technology, visuals, prompts and other scaffolded supports. Our multi-sited school community is comprised of five sites, with our main building located in Community School District 10, and our four, self-contained special education off-sites all co-located in Community School Districts 7 and 9. Our students are children with autism, intellectual disabilities and other health needs in Grades K-6, all with Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) following both standardized and alternate assessment promotion and testing criteria annually. We have both self-contained specialized special education (6:1:1, 8:1:1 and 12:1:1, Grades K-8) and Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classroom learning environments (Grades 2 and 3), as well as six Bilingual self-contained special education classes (Grades K-5). Our school community also embeds a scaffolded positive behavior and intervention supports program school wide into all classroom learning environments using our school mantra "L.E.A.D" as its foundation and then scaffolded for developmental and abilities level appropriateness taking our school mascot, Leon The Lion, into account. Integrated Co-Teaching classes for Early Childhood and Elementary grades; 1. 2. Self-contained Bilingual Spanish special education classes in 6:1:1, 8:1:1 and 12:1:1 classroom learning environments for students in Grades K-3; 3. Our children's movement into LRE is an ongoing highlight, with movement into LRE doubling from Year 1 into Year 2, and tripling from Year 2 into Year 3; By the end of Year 4, the majority of our students moving LRE moved directly into community school placements as opposed to District 75 inclusive education programs as their first benchmark/milestone. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. P469X's school community continuously supports the expectations and vision of District 75 and the vision of the Chancellor's Framework for Great Schools. P469X conducts ongoing school level needs assessments, and utilizes a variety of data sources to analyze trends and triangulate data. These data sources are utilized to identify strengths and prioritize needs relative to the elements of the Framework for Great Schools. Data sources include: (1) School Level Needs Assessments, (2) Student Achievement Data i.e. student benchmarks related to IEP goals, state and local testing and student portfolio work, and (3) The most current data from school accountability tools and measures 1  (2017-2018 Quality Review, 2017-2018 Principal Performance Report, 2017-2018 School Quality Snapshot, and the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey). Strengths and Accomplishments Identified and Noted in Alignment with the Framework for Great Schools:  Effective Leadership, Collaborative Teachers, Strong Family Community Ties  L.R.E. Areas of Focus for the 2018-2019 School Year: Rigorous Instruction, Strengthening Pedagogy and Providing Access via Hi/Lo Tech entry points to support students' Preferred Modes of Communication- Further development is needed in using data effectively to differentiate instruction in order to meet the needs of diverse learners. Teacher teams will engage in looking at student work, and ongoing assessment data to make adjustments to the curriculum and instructional practices. Establishing systems for monitoring the progress of students and incorporating strategies to provide access to instruction are aligned with our instructional focus for the 2018-2019 school year. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75X469 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 342 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 90.0% % Attendance Rate 88.6% % Reduced Lunch 26.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 58.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.5% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0% 0% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 0.9% 100.0% 33.9% 3.8% 0.3% 2 0% 5.6 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment - Rigorous Instruction: Rigorous Instruction is essential to the instructional core of teaching, learning and development (Teacher knowledge and skill, students' engagement in their own learning, and academic/skills based challenging content). The instructional core links curriculum (1.1), pedagogy (1.2) and assessment (2.2). Strengths: Data Source: Overall Strengths Noted: 1. Purposefully adopted, CCLS-aligned curricula that integrates shifts as well as academic/personal behaviors (Indicator 1.1 Curriculum) 2. Unit, lesson plans and tasks are planned and adjusted to include differentiated strategies for ELLs and students with disabilities and tiered to meet individual student learning needs. (Indicator 1.1 Curriculum) 3. School leaders have adopted curricula for ELA and math that provide coherence across 2017-2018 Quality Review the grades. (Indicator 1.1 Curriculum) 4. Well Developed rating and area of celebration noted for 2.2 Assessment 5. Ongoing work of teacher/transdisciplinary teams to improve student learning (Indicator 4.2 - Teacher Teams) NYCDOE School Survey Over a three year trajectory, survey results increased from 3.26 in 2015-2016 to 3.52 in 2016-2017 and currently to ____ in 2017-2018. These scores are reflective of common core shifts in literacy and math, course clarity and quality of student discussion. School Level Ongoing Needs Assessments 1. Classroom and cluster teachers shared that they want to dig deeper into the curricular/instructional program materials and kits in order to more effectively "unpack" them, creating, planning and preparing stronger connections between skills and standards in learning activities and experiences. 2. Cluster teachers shared that they want to better align their content area instruction to not only core areas (reading, writing and math), but also the arts. 3. Paraprofessionals shared that they want to learn more instructional components of the curricula and programs in order to strengthen the supports provided during class instructional time. 4 4. Related Services Providers are integrated into the classroom learning environments and want to continue working on their collaborative efforts between related services departments and school-to-home connections. They also want to more strategically align and "stagger" their services with student needs and strengths throughout the course of the day, working as interdisciplinary related services teams throughout the day, within each site. 5. Based on family engagement and family survey interests, we also identified a 87.8% interest in expanding our Dual Language and overall Bilingual programming and offerings in the 2018-2019 school year. Priorities: A triangulation of data from our 2017-2018 Quality Review, 2017-2018 Principal Performance Report and School-Level Needs Assessments shows that our priority area to enhance and move to the next level is Pedagogy (Indicator 1.2). 2017-2018 Quality Review Teachers’ use of questioning, scaffolds and multiple entry points addresses the diverse learning needs of individual students and highly engages them in their learning; however high-quality extensions were not observed. (1.2 Pedagogy) 2017-2018 PPR In order to move instructional practice to the next level, it is essential to help teachers recognize and demonstrate how to prove student thinking and understanding by answering the questions: “What skill skill are you teaching?” “What strategy are you using?” and “What is your evidence of learning?” Developmentally appropriate strategies should be identified to ensure that each student has an entry point to engage in tasks at his/her assessed instructional level, with corresponding materials to demonstrate their learning and ability to accurately complete the task. School Level Needs Assessments Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, all teachers will unpack different instructional methods, strategies and routines for promoting foundational skills across all content areas, resulting in at least a 7% increase from Fall 2018/BOY to Spring 2019/EOY raw scores in Reading, Writing, Math and Communication Development subtests in SANDI. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). LITERACY, MATHEMATICS and SEL/PBIS: Classroom Teachers Paraprofessionals Cluster Teachers Related Services CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, ASSESSMENT, Grades K-8 Strategic selection and implementation of curricular programs aligned with abilities groupings across classrooms and grade bands (TCRWP, First Author Writing, Attainment/Fundations, Go Math, SEL/PBIS) (June 2018-August 2018). Teams will utilize assessment data to inform daily instruction for small groups and 1:1 instruction through components/structure of literacy/math blocks (I.e. scaffolded lessons in Whole Class/Guided Math/Stations and Whole Class/Stations). Literacy components evident will include: Whole Class Read-Alouds, Four Targeted Literacy Centers. Math components evident will include: Tiered workshop model lessons, guided math and centers aligned to guided instruction and number sense/appropriate activities (Mid-October 2018 - June 2019). Teams will develop and implement CCLS and skills based units in literacy and math, embedding data based scaffolding for multiple entry points, high quality supports and extensions .(Mid-October 2018 - June 2018). These plans will be collaboratively available in teacher team work groups and part of P.L. Mondays. 9/4/18 through 6/26/19 Administration: Principal and APs (All Phases) Instructional Cabinet Members: Site Coordinators & Coaches/Staff Developers (All Phases) Members of the Promising Practices Team: Classroom Teachers Paraprofessionals Cluster Teachers Related Services (Phase 1, Phase 3, Phase 4) 6  Strategies, Skills and Professional Learning That Will Impact Change: All Team Leaders October 2018 - June 2019 (Phase 3, Phase 4) Administration: Principal and APs Teacher Teams (All Phases) Curriculum Coaches and Site Coordinators Planning Teams (All Phases) Coaching Team Members of the Promising Practices Team: Classroom Teachers Paraprofessionals Cluster Teachers Related Services (Phase 1, Phase 3, Phase 4) Team Leaders (Phase 3, Phase 4)  Training and Professional Learning for selected assessment tools (SANDI/FAST, Fountas and Pinnell, IEP Goal Progress Monitoring, Related Services Tools) (Ongoing plus targeted in August 2018, October 2018, November 2018, January 2019, March 2019).  Training and Professional Learning for selected curricula-based programs (CKLA, Fundations, Go Math, content-areas, Attainment) (Ongoing plus targeted in action research/PL cycles)  Training, Professional Learning and Strategic use of repurposed workdays on Mondays and Tuesdays to focus on alignment between IEP goals and instructional practices during targeted portions of the school day. (Ongoing plus targeted in action research/PL cycles - Cycles are pre-planned with targeted learning focus areas and distributed at the start of the first collaborative planning session in August/September 2018) Strategic use of team leaders, Promising Practices Committee Members and Repurposed Workdays on Mondays and Tuesdays focus on alignment between IEP goals and instructional practices during targeted portions of the school day. (November 2018-June 2019) Strategically designed schedules and program cards, embedding skills-based centers into the day that function and enrich student achievement goals and targets. (Summer 2018 for Fall 2018; Winter 2019 for Winter/Spring 2019). Professional Activities Periods are aligned directly with these expectations, including protocols. Coaching Cycles Connected with Administrative Observation cycles. 7  Model Teachers will be strategically assigned to support our multi-sited school community throughout the course of the 2018-2019 school year. Engaging Families and our School Community By: Repurposed workday on Tuesdays allows for Parent Engagement, providing time to invite parents in for workshops and trainings to learn about strategies they can use at home, reinforcing these elements as follows: Our P469X Families Ongoing from 9/8/18-6/26/19 Daily parent communication Saturday Programming Family Weekend Training Academies Open House, Curriculum Day, Curriculum Night, Monthly Newsletters Cluster Team Project-Based Learning Walks Parent workshops and trainings aligned with homework help, instructional strategies to use at home Lead Teacher Assistants (LTAs) will co-facilitate workshops for paraprofessional teams and families Comprehensive assessment results (baseline, midyear and end of year) for SANDI/FAST, Fountas and Pinnell IEP Goals Administration: Principal and APs (All Phases) Curriculum Coaches and Site Coordinators (All Phases) All School Teaching Teams: Classroom Teachers Paraprofessionals Cluster Teachers Related Services Lead Teacher Assistants (All Phases) PTA SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Transdisciplinary teams will review curriculum and plans during Summer 2018 family orientation, September 2018 open house/meet and greet and during Family Engagement Tuesdays throughout the school year. Parent workshops 8  and trainings will also be provided, including Title III Saturday Academies and interactive literacy/math and content area-themed nights, school wide. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Administrative and Instructional Cabinet, including School Leaders as instructional leaders, site coordinators and instructional coaches 2. Principals’ Promising Practices Committee on both voluntary and per session bases. 3. Strategic school wide scheduling, embedding common preps for horizontal/vertical planning and professional learning opportunities within the school day 4. Using repurposed work days for professional learning cycles 5. Internal/external professional development opportunities for staff/team including District 75 PD, NYCDOE PD and other companies/resources 6. Core Curriculum Materials/Opt-In 7. Use of Per Session Funding/Sources for Saturday Academies 8. Use of TL Funding for Arts Partnerships throughout the year 9. Title III Funding supports ENL/ELL student achievement 10. NYCDOE supports for Teacher Leaders. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmark: At least a 3% overall gain above baseline in at least two of the four subtests identified in SANDI from EOY 2018 to BOY/Mid-Point 2019 Timeframes for Mid-Point Benchmarks: 1. 2/10/19 (in alignment with the 2nd administration of Running Records) 2. 3/7/19 (in alignment with March Parent Teacher Conferences and IEP Progress Monitoring/Goal Updates) 3. 4/5/19 (in alignment with the 2nd administration of SANDI/FAST Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) SANDI/FAST Fountas & Pinnell Running Records IEP Goals Initial LRE Candidate List Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Needs Assessment: Supportive Environment Data Source: Strengths: 1. Teachers, and teacher teams, consistently collaborate to analyze student data, and information, particularly for students they are focused on (high needs sub groups, varied abiity level groups, etc.) , making connections to classroom practices in support of the curriculum and in driving goals (2017-2018 QR, Indicator 4.2 - Teacher Teams). 2. Teacher collaborations support the development of teacher practices, consistently strengthening staff instructional capacity and ensuring all students are making progress toward academic and individual goals (2017-2018 QR, Indicator 4.2 - Teacher Teams). A trajectory of data shows that (t.b.d. based on final data analysis - will be updated in July 2018).  Classroom teachers shared that they want to more closely align our professional learning cycles with the analysis of student work and "bite sized" data sets throughout the course of professional learning cycles.  Classroom and cluster teachers shared that they want to dig deeper into the curricular/instructional program materials and kits in order to more effectively "unpack" them, creating, planning and preparing stronger connections between skills and standards in learning activities and experiences.  Cluster teachers shared that they want to better align their content area instruction to not only core areas (reading, writing and math), but also the arts.  Paraprofessionals shared that they want to learn more instructional components of the curricula and programs in order to strengthen the supports provided during class instructional time. They also shared that they want to take a more active role in planning/preparation and the lesson planning process within their classroom learning environments in order to better support students' learning needs.  Related Services Providers are integrated into the classroom learning environments and want to continue working on their collaborative efforts between related services departments and school-to-home connections. They also want to more strategically align and "stagger" their services with student needs and strengths throughout the course of the day, working as interdisciplinary related services teams throughout the day, within each site. 2017-2018 Quality Review NYC School Survey School-Based Needs Assessments 1  Priorities: While our current system has proven to be effective we strongly believe there is additional room for improvement. Our goal is to ensure that all classrooms are implementing our system with fidelity because this will allow us to make decisions based on impact furthermore it will reduce our incidents to potentially zero. Even with such evidence-based gains and strengths, the following priority needs will be addressed in this particular element and action plan One area of need was related to student behavior. Teachers commented that there was a need for help with students resolving conflicts and that they needed further help with addressing student behavior issues. This includes the need to continue to build teachers’ proactive behavior management skills and strategies. These skills are foundational to facilitating a supportive and positive school environment and climate which caters for all students’ academic as well as social and emotional needs. Our analysis of data revealed that we needed to increase teachers and parents shared understandings of effective proactive and positive behavior management techniques, to develop “positive proactive classrooms” in every classroom in our school (Supportive Environment, Collaborative Teachers) 1. Enhancing our PBIS, school wide, with an action plan that includes "re-launching" 2. Enhancing our use of Behavior Support Plans (BSPs), Behavioral Intervention Plans (BIPs) and Functional Behavioral Assessments ( FBAs ) during clinical/child study meetings to look at trends and patterns occurring across all related data sets. 3. Enhance and refine the connections between data sets and resources connected with supportive environment, Domain 2 of the FFT, and the work of our School Implementation Team (SIT) when looking at movement towards LRE and integration into general education. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, school wide teams will deepen both their exploration and implementation of resources to support teaching and student learning of SEL/PBIS skills and strategies across all domains of learning, resulting in at least a 5% increase from BOY 2018 student raw scores in SANDI SEL subtests and MOTP overall scores for Domain 2: Classroom Environment for teacher teams. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Design and implement six week Social Emotional Learning Unit of Study to launch the school year, focusing on routines, rituals, behavioral expectations, etc. All Classes 9/2018-10/2018 Administration: (Phase One) Principal and APs (All Phases) Curriculum Coaches (All Phases) RTI Team (All Phases) All School Teaching Teams: Classroom Teachers Paraprofessionals Cluster Teachers Related Services RTI Team and School Psychologist will work on designing School Wide PBIS Phase 2 plan as a team, with the launch scheduled for Election Day PD Day 2018. All Classes (All Phases) RTI Team (All Phases) October 2018-November 2018 for launch/preparation 3  November 2018-June 2019 on going implementation All School Teaching Teams: Classroom Teachers Paraprofessionals Cluster Teachers Related Services (All Phases) Administration: Principal and APs (All Phases) Curriculum Coaches and Site Coordinators (All Phases) Administration: Principal and APs Engaging Families and our School Community By: All Families Monthly between October 2018 and May 2019 Repurposed workday on Tuesdays allows for Parent Engagement, providing time to invite parents in for workshops and trainings to learn about strategies they can use at home, reinforcing these elements as follows: Daily parent communication Early Childhood after school and Saturday Programming Family Weekend Training Academies Open House, Curriculum Day, Curriculum Night, Monthly Newsletters (All Phases) Every other Tuesday between October 2018 and May 2019 Curriculum Coaches and Site Coordinators (All Phases) All School Teaching Teams: Classroom Teachers 4 Paraprofessionals Cluster Teachers Related Services Lead Teacher Assistants (All Phases) PTA SLT Entire School Community Ongoing throughout the 2018-2019 school year with cyclical themes occurring every 6 to 8 weeks Cluster Team Project-Based Learning Walks Parent workshops and trainings aligned with making school to home connections for skills, strategies and behavioral interventions. Lead Teacher Assistants (LTAs) will co-facilitate workshops for paraprofessional teams and families on Extended Day Tuesdays as part of Family Engagement Tuesday. Instructional Cabinet will facilitate trainings for teacher teams/families on how to use tools to track and monitor progress for PBIS, FBA, BIP and BSPs. Provide information and support to and for families in the area of social emotional learning. Tools and Resources To Use To Track/Monitor Progress Towards Meeting This Goal: Entire School Community FBA/BIP/BSP progress monitoring IEP Goals PBIS data/daily data tracking sheets and monthly behavior graphs. Attendance at family engagement events and after school/Saturday programming. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Engagement Tuesdays focused on a series of sessions for PBIS school to home connections BIP/FBA transdisciplinary/clinical meetings 5  Wellness Calls and Check ins Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Resources and materials associated with the school wide system launch (timers, charts, tables, graphs, etc. 2. Administrative Cabinet, including School Leaders as instructional leaders, site coordinators and instructional coaches 3. Strategic use of election pd day to launch phase two training, school wide. 4. Cohesive scheduling, embedding common preps for horizontal planning and professional, collegial conversations 5. Using repurposed work days for professional learning cycles 6. Professional development facilitated by school leaders, instructional coaches and publishing companies 7. Coaching supports Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Mid-Point Benchmark: At least a 5% overall gain above baseline (individual student behavioral goals in SLL, FBA/BIP/IEP focused on behavior). Timeframe for Mid-Point Progress: 02/10/19). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Daily, Weekly, and Monthly PBIS data FBA/BIP Assessment and Review Decrease in 1:1 related services paraprofessionals mandated Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment: Priorities: Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, in collaborative, interdisciplinary teams, teacher teams will expand their teaching and learning toolkits of strategies to help establish, dig deeper into and support successful, everyday teaching and learning, resulting in at least a 5% increase in Overall MOTP HEDI Points aligned with Charlotte Danielson’s Framework for Teaching Components 1a, 1e, 3b, 3d and 4e. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional Learning Cycles All classroom learning environments Repurposed Work Day has a clear focus and structure, including a calendar of professional learning topics that build upon each other to allow for continuous learning Support and clarification (look fors and listen fors) on Danielson FFT to support staff in utilizing the framework to maximize their instructional practices October 2018: Administration PL Cycles Begin Monthly Targets focused on observations/actionable next steps Instructional Cabinet Teacher Teams Targeted intervisitations between staff to gain exposure, peer modeling and best practices within the school organization All classroom learning environments October 2018: Administration Horizontal and vertical collaboration and common planning among teachers in the same instructional program to ensure collaboration within instructional practices and behavior support. PL Cycle One Instructional Cabinet November/December 2018: Teacher Teams Parents as Partners: Effective strategies will be shared with parents through parent teacher conferences, IEP meetings, parent engagement workshops, parent newsletters PL Cycle Two Monthly Targets focused on observations/actionable next steps 8  D75/DOE/School Visits and Meetings within NYC All classroom learning environments Norms and protocols for collegial planning and professional learning teams will be established ad utilized to help support and develop trust between colleagues September 2018 - Administration Baseline information from learning walks and informal visits Instructional Cabinet October/November 2018 - Teacher Teams Responsive coaching feedback, modeling and co teaching in classrooms as needed based on informal observations, common trends and assessment data Observation cycles and Coaching cycles begin Families December 2018/January 2019: Calibration and revisions January/February 2019: Cycles Continue March/April 2018: Calibration May 2018: Plan and Prepare for 2018-2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will have opportunities to engage with teacher teams and their work during benchmarking meetings, progress monitoring meetings throughout the school year, with a minimum of 4 to 6 meetings in total. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 9  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. Resources and materials associated with the school wide system launch (timers, charts, tables, graphs, etc. 2. Administrative Cabinet, including School Leaders as instructional leaders, site coordinators and instructional coaches 3. Core Curriculum materials 4. Cohesive scheduling, embedding common preps for horizontal planning and professional, collegial conversations 5. Using repurposed work days for professional learning cycles 6. Professional development facilitated by school leaders, instructional coaches and publishing companies 7. Coaching supports 8. Framework for Teaching resources Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA X Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Mid-Point Benchmark: At least a 5% overall gain above baseline in informal observation ratings for Domain 1 in the FFT. Baseline is determined from an average of EOY Ratings from the previous year and September 2018 Learning Walks. Timeframe for Mid-Point Progress: 02/10/19). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 1. ADVANCE observations/feedback implementation from observations 2. Learning walks 3. Coaching Conversations and implementation of feedback provided 4. Implementation and Analysis of P469X Three Tiered Support System for Professional Learning Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. As school leaders, P469X wants to continue modeling our vision of "Leading and Educating By Knowing, Doing and Being" for all school community members. NEEDS ASSESSMENT - EFFECTIVE SCHOOL LEADERSHIP: Strengths Noted From Data Analysis From Quality Review, Principal Performance Reports, School Quality Guide and P469X School Level Needs Assessments:  P469X earned an increase in score by 0.33 (3.65 to 3.98) in 2016-2017 School Quality Guide  In all four areas of Effective School Leadership, P469X earned 90% or higher (Inclusive Leadership, Teacher Influence, Program Coherence, Instructional Leadership) 2016-2017 School Quality Guide  P469X consistently earns well-developed ratings in resource allocation and management (QR Indicator 1.3, Principal Performance Reports) Priorities Noted From Data Analysis From Quality Review, Principal Performance Reports, School Quality Guide and P469X School Level Needs Assessments: Even with such evidence-based gains and strengths, the following priority needs will be addressed in this particular element and action plan. There is an ongoing need for further involvement and awareness of strategic decision-making with teacher leaders. Teacher/Stakeholder leadership is one of our school community's strengths, and we need to continue focusing on refining our processes further to maximize teacher/stakeholder involvement and efficacy:  Consistently folllowing up and following through on school wide, classroom level and individual team members expectations within and across the sites by all school leaders  Ensuring that learning walk and observation feedback are not only timely and structured, but also includes meaningful "bite sized", targeted next steps leading to increased student achievement  Continuously monitoring and revising planning and preparation that takes place during common planning and repurposed work days during teacher team work.  Continue to build school culture through collaborative decision-making teacher teams, including stakeholder leadership 1  Continue to include stakeholders in decisions regarding curriculum, resources and establishing partnerships with outside arts organizations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By the end of the 2018-2019 school year, the school principal will continue to build distributive, collaborative leadership structures and the promotion of school team capacity building involving key stakeholders of the P469X school community, resulting in enhancements in professional learning and its impact on student learning as evidenced by at least a 5% increase in Overall MOTP HEDI points aligned with Danielson's Framework for Teaching for Components 3c, 4a, and 4e captured by both teacher observation and student outcomes data. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? High Quality, Cohesive Instructional Experiences Across Sites: All stakeholders 9/4/18-6/26/18 Administration Overseeing, modeling and holding educators accountable for the implementation, design and integration of assessment and instructional programs into their repertoires of teaching, learning and development. Providing timely, specific feedback to all stakeholders, both for stakes and not for stakes, in order to ensure clear expectations and standards are being met and/or exceeded Based on informal and formal observations, provide educators with specifically designed, targeted professional learning cycles and training opportunities in the form of intervisitations, coaching, common planning, conversations, etc. Integrating parents and families into our school community as partners with and for the teaching, learning and development of their children, particularly during Tuesday Family Engagement Days PA/SLT Meetings School Wide Events Site Based Events All stakeholders 9/4/18-6/26/19 Administration Instructional Cabinet All stakeholders 9/4/18-6/26/18 Administration Instructional Cabinet Families PTA SLT 3  SIT All stakeholders 9/4/18-6/26/19 Administration Instructional Cabinet Notice, invitations to school, etc. sent home in the parents native language to increase awareness of upcoming family engagement opportunities Bring in community based organizations to support and expose our families to different resources available to them, while providing them with an engaging and meaningful way to connect to their child’s school community School principal coaches and models for all staff how to implement effective problem solving skills and strategies through accountable talk, coaching conversations, “Ten Minute Tubiolo Time” individualized meetings for all stakeholders School Leader support all stakeholders in their teaching, learning and development at the point and/or level that he or she is performing at, celebrating successes and small incremental sets of progress along the journey Daily Team Huddles across sites 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Family benchmarks and Family Engagement Tuesday meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. School leaders, instructional coaches, site coordinators, materials and resources associated with our daily routines, rituals and practices. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 4  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Mid-Point Benchmark: At least a 5% overall gain above baseline in informal observation ratings for Domains 1 and 3 of the Framework for Teaching) Timeframe for Mid-Point Progress: 02/20/19). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ADVANCE Meeting and/or exceeding mid year benchmarks for all CEP goals Creating new and enhancing already existing partnerships and use of shared resources with our colocated communities Agenda, sign in sheets and attendance at meetings and events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Needs Assessment for Strong Family and Community Ties: Even with evidence-based gains and strengths in this area as a school community, the following priority needs will be addressed for the 2018-2019 school year.  Increase active family engagement by recruiting new elected officials for our PA/PTA vacancies for the 2018-2019 school year  Enhance connections between PTA and SLT, with emphasis placed on community based connections and outreach  Enhance community based partnerships throughout the school year, and welcome a Parent Coordinator to our school community for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. P469X will facilitate ongoing events and activities in order to provide family friendly venues to increase family engagement and parent involvement and support beginning in August 2018 with at least a 10% increase in active family participation and at least a 5% increase in community based partnerships by June of 2019. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). High Quality, Cohesive Instructional Experiences Across Sites: all stakeholders ● Workshops and trainings geared specifically towards assessment and instructional programs and strategies we use throughout the day to make school to home connections ● Parent Volunteers during Literacy/Math blocks Instructional nights/family activities Targeted, Individualized Skill-Based Centers Integrated into Approaches for Learning to Address the Needs of ALL Learners: all stakeholders Providing ample opportunities for families to become involved in the school community, including events, activities and workshops specifically in alignment with parent survey responses Ongoing/monthly from October 2018 through May 2019 Administration Instructional Cabinet Related Services All stakeholders PA/PTA and SLT 9/4/18-6/26/19 Administration Instructional Cabinet Related Services All stakeholders PA/PTA and SLT 7  Parents as Partners ● PA/SLT Meetings ● School Wide Events ● Site Based Events ● Notice, invitations to school, etc. sent home in the parents native language to increase awareness of upcoming family engagement opportunities Bring in community based organizations to support and expose our families to different resources available to them, while providing them with an engaging and meaningful way to connect to their child’s school community all stakeholders 9/4/18-6/26/19 Administration Instructional Cabinet Related Services All stakeholders PA/PTA and SLT Mutual Trust, Value and Respect Embedded into Our School Culture and Community in Support of This Goal : all stakeholders 9/4/18-6/26/19 Administration ● Popcorn and Movie Nights and “Bring a Blanket – Our School is a Home Away from Home”  P469X Family Day at Yankee or CitiField Stadiums  Puppet Shows hosted at each site/school wide Instructional Cabinet Related Services All stakeholders PA/PTA and SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Attendance at events and meetings. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SLT, PTA, company and vendor donations 8  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Mid-Point Benchmark: At least a 10% increase in parental involvement) Timeframe for Mid-Point Progress: 02/10/19). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Needs assessment and survey responses School Messenger "Number of Hits" on our Bilingual School Website (launching this year) Increased number of participants in our Thematic End of Unit Celebrations of Success Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students are assessed using WebABLLS-R. Analyses of the results, specifically in the domains of Receptive Language, Requests, Labeling and Intraverbals. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) One-to-One; Small group; skill based centers During the school day Fundations: Teachers incorporate Fundations lessons into their language arts classroom instruction. These lessons focus on carefully sequenced skills that include print knowledge, alphabet awareness, phonological awareness, phonemic awareness, decoding, vocabulary, fluency, and spelling. During Storytime activities, critical thinking, speaking and listening skills are practiced. BrightStart: a curriculum that focuses on numerous pre-reading skills, such as Letter identification, letter sounds, print concepts, and emergent writing; Oral language skills, including story comprehension and vocabulary; Phonological awareness, including breaking words apart 0  Mathematics Science Social Studies into syllables and rhyming. Technical Devices: SmartBoard; iPads; Laptops; Desktops Scaffolded Instruction: Using Go Math guidelines, instruction is scaffolded to provide access points to students at either a higher or lower functioning level depending on the needs of the student (K-2) during math instruction. Hands-On: use of manipulatives to reinforce skills taught during Math Instruction Technical Devices: SmartBoard; iPads; Laptops; Desktops Scaffolded Instruction: STEM instruction is scaffolded to provide access points to students at either a higher or lower functioning level depending on the needs of the students in (K-2). Technical Devices: SmartBoard; iPads; Laptops; Desktops Scaffolded Instruction: STEM instruction is scaffolded to provide access points to students at either a Students are assessed using WebABLLS-R. Analyses of the results, specifically in the domains of Visual Performance, Receptive Language and Labeling. GoMath Pre/Post assessments are administered. Students are assessed using WebABLLS-R. Analyses of the results, specifically in the domains of Receptive Language, Requests, Labeling, Intraverbals and Visual Performance Students are assessed using WebABLLS-R. Analyses of the results, specifically in the domains of One-to-One; Small groups; skill based centers During the school day One-to-One Services; Small Groups During the school day One-to-One Services; Small Groups During the school day 1 One-to-One Services; Small Groups During the school day. Receptive Language, Requests, Labeling and Intraverbals higher or lower functioning level depending on the needs of the students in (K-2). At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Behavior is tracked daily using individual behavioral goals on a through the school-wide PBIS system. Progress Monitoring of Functional Behavior Analyses and Behavior Intervention Plans included in students’ IEPs. Technical Devices: SmartBoard; iPads; Laptops; Desktops PBIS: School-wide system behavior system that tracks individual progress toward behavioral goals daily across the school day TCI-S: A strength based program to be used during crises to build staff understanding of individual student disturbance and help the student to understand his/her own conflicts and how to manage behavior in a more constructive manner. Social Emotional Literacy Program: Students learn how to label and regulate their emotions using the mood meter and literary texts. Social Stories: Small narratives created to help students to understand social emotional issues. 2  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. na Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). na 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 3  na 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. na 4  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A we are not a Title I school. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A we are not a Title I school. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A We are not a TA School 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 5  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 6  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 75X469, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 75X469 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 9  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 75X469, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 0  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 1  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 2  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 3  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 4  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Overview of School-Day Programs and Services for ELLs at P469X (Cycle 1 - Four Saturdays/Weeks- 12/8/18 through 1/5/19; Cycle 2 - Four Saturdays/Weeks - 3/9/19 through 3/30/19 = Total of 8 Weeks) P469X - The Bronx School for Continuous Learners is a school for students in Grades K-8 with moderate to severe disabilities, all with IEPs. These disabilities include intellectual disability, autism, multiple disabilities, emotional needs, speech impaired, and other health impairments. There are 328 students in our school organization. Of these, 108 (32.9%) are English language learner/limited English proficient (ELL/LEP) students. DESCRIPTION OF THE DIRECT SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAM: Type of Program/activities: Title III Saturday Family/Child Celebration of Multilingualism Arts Programming , Professional Development, and Parental Involvement program celebrates multilingual literacy within our school community for all languages, all families. This year, the program will emphasize phonics-based instruction for our children in 6:1:1 classrooms and reading comprehension for our children in 8:1:1, 12:1:1 and ICT making connections between language, literacy and the arts. SCHEDULE AND DURATION: Our Saturday supplemental instructional program, to run 8 weeks, divided into two, four week cycles from 10AM-12PM as follows: Cycle 1 - Four Saturdays/Weeks- 12/8/18 through 1/5/19; Cycle 2 - Four Saturdays/Weeks - 3/9/19 through 3/30/19 = Total of 8 Weeks) LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION: English using ENL methodologies STAFFING: 6 certified ENL and/or certified bilingual special education teachers with four funded from different funding sources and two funded through Title III LEP funds. The program also includes 6 Bilingual paraprofessionals (1 Bengali, 1 Chinese, 1 Fulani, and 3 Spanish speaking paraprofessionals). A school administrator and secretary are also needed for the program, and will be funded utilizing a separate funding source. TYPES OF MATERIALS: arts partnership/programming with Marquis Studios, classroom/audio libraries, iPad bundle, lamination paper, Estrellita Kits, copy paper, printer ink. Title III-funded direct instruction will be provided to 96 ELLs over the course of two cycles. Half the students will participate in the first cycle, and half the students will participate in the second. The Title III staff is sufficient to ensure that IEP staffing mandates are met. Instruction during this program is in English using ENL methodologies and some native language support and reinforcement of concepts and skills with the assistance of bilingual (Spanish/English, Bengali/English, and Fulani/English and other language(s) as necessary) paraprofessionals. Six paraprofessionals (Bengali, Chinese, Fulani, and Spanish) will translate instructional materials and materials for parents. One bilingual Spanish paraprofessional will assist in whole group activities, assessments and group stations. Six certified bilingual and/or ENL teachers will ensure that all students receive direct instruction through ENL methodologies from a certified bilingual teacher (Two teachers funded from another source and four funded as part of Title III LEP funding. A supervisor will be present. The program will also be staffed by 5 bilingual paraprofessionals, 1 school secretary, 1 bilingual school psychologist and 1 to 2 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information administrators. In order to extend the program, the bilingual school psychologist, administrators and school secretary will be funded from a different funding source. The program will focus on supporting students’ acquisition of listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English, integrating technology and in reinforcing students’ language skills through: 1) participation in scientific discovery, 2) research of dinosaurs found in regional areas, and 3) application of safe practices and choices in their daily lives. Parents work and learn along-side their youngsters throughout the program, engaging in geographical discussions, observations and project based activities, conducting research using the Internet, creating international dinosaur posters and cultural activities that students can engage in with their peers and/or parents. Using ENL methodologies and scaffolds, teachers will help students explore multilingual and diverse language and literacy through the arts activities and inference activities, resulting in both a culminating show and family performance at the end of each cycle. Students will engage in interdisciplinary activities/tasks and will also practice collaborating by creating their paintings, short plays and other mixed media activities (i.e. collages, dances, performances). To build on this concept students will use technology to plan and perform the play. Teacher-generated assessments (rubrics, checklists), SANDI/FAST, and NYSESLAT scores will be used to monitor their progress along the language-learning continuum. A school administrator is needed to ensure that all compliance and instructional components are met. Parents and students from the four 6:1:1 and each of the 12:1:1 and the 8:1:1 classes will reunite for the last 30 minutes of each session for “Let's Talk” reflections and evaluation of activities. Students, parents, and staff will use the gym, multipurpose room, and/or classrooms. The bilingual paraprofessionals along with the bilingual teachers will facilitate conversations with parents and students. The chart below depicts the flow of the day: 10:00AM-10:15AM Whole Group Celebration of Multilingualism and Getting Ready for Today's Learning Activities 10:15AM-10:20AM Transition to Activity Areas/Rooms/Break Out Sessions 10:30AM-11:30AM Concurrent Classes/Break Out Sessions 11:30AM-12:00PM Whole Group Reconvenes/Share Out-Shout Out-Plan for Upcoming Week Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Teachers, paraprofessionals, and administrators will participate in a 4 week PD Institute, 1 hour for each session 2:30-3:30PM, on Wednesdays) before the start of the program's first cycle that will address instructional approaches, data collection, and working with parents of ELLs (e.g., interpretation, translation, and confidentiality). The structure of the PD institute will be four, 1 hour sessions, twice per month, for a total of 4 sessions. In these sessions, which will be led by all teachers on the Title III staff, we will discuss strategies for working with parents, for working with ELLs with disabilities, and to explore issues that impact teaching and learning as they relate to ELLs with disabilities. The following topics will be covered 7  Part C: Professional Development 1) Working with ELL Parents: Confidentiality, Translation, and Interpretation; 2) Using the Learning Experience as a vehicle for Instructing ELLs with Disabilities 3) Integrating the scientific method into instruction for ELLs with disabilities 4) Data Collection (using rubrics & checklists) Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Content Parents will receive the Title III parent notification letter from the school in their home languages. Parents are fully integrated into the P469X Title III Saturday program. Parents will work alongside their youngsters for 3 of the 4 Saturdays per cycle, with the assistance of the Title III staff/team who will observe student/parent interactions and model effective strategies for engaging their youngsters and promoting communicative interaction among parents and students. The parents will join students and staff to participate in integrating communication and socialization-focused recreational activities (making posters, excavating, research) and follow-up activities that they can do at home and in the community to help reinforce and provide practice and generalization for concepts that their youngsters worked on in the instructional program. Whole group facilitation for their participation during the opening activity will also be supported by the Title III staff/team. After the opening activity, parents will join their youngsters in one of two break out sessions. Parents will rotate with their respective groups after 30 minutes with a particular teacher/in a particular learning space. They will move as a group to the next teacher/learning space. They will rotate once more in the same manner. In collaboration with our arts programming, the Title III Team/Staff will work with each group of parents for 40 minutes, observing parent/youngster interactions and modeling strategies for supporting their child’s independence and choice-making, and use and increase of age-appropriate communication, socialization, and functional skills. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem $10,391.16 ($9,504.80 + $886.36 = $10,391.16) Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. $9,504.80 in staffing Staff for Supplemental Instructional Component: 8  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 4 Teachers at 2 hours per day x $60.65 = $363.90 per day x 8 weeks = $3,881.60 6 paraprofessionals at 2 hours per day x $34.73 = $416.76 per day x 8 weeks = $3,334.08 *Bilingual School Psychologist, Secretary and Administration/Supervision referenced in the narrative are funded from a different funding source. $886.36 in Professional Development, curriculum development and program support for arts programming, guided reading strategies/leveled libraries and other early literacy skills and strategies to support Title III team supplemental programming 6 teachers x 4 hours x $60.65 = $1455.60 6 paraprofessionals x 4 hours x $34.73 = $833.52 Arts Partnership for Multilingualism and the Arts Interdisciplinary PD and Curriculum Development with Marquis Studios (3, two hour sessions and 3 planning sessions) Supplemental Instructional Program: Supplies instructional, and parent programs (to create symbols, posters, instructional materials, etc. & parent activities) as follows: Markers, DVDs relating to program, laminating paper, velcro, chart paper, pencils, paint, copy paper, ink, phonics kits = $699.84 Purchased services  High quality staff $1275.00 and curriculum development contracts. $699.84 Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. 9 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. n/a Metro cards for parents will be funded from a different funding source. $12,366.00 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel $0.00 $0.00 Other TOTAL $0.00 $12,366.00 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name The Bronx School For Continuous Learners Borough Bronx School Number 469 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Janine Tubiolo Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Alex LaPorta/Yudelka Ramirez Teacher/Subject Area Raisa Maruri Teacher/Subject Area n/a Related-Service Provider Tamica Balay Superintendent Ketler Louissant Assistant Principal Marcia Pitt Coach n/a School Counselor Gladys Manosalvas Parent Digma Antigua Parent Coordinator n/a Field Support Center Staff Member n/a Other (Name and Title) n/a C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 4 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 4 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 279 1 Total number of ELLs 88 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.54%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 3 4 1 1 2 1 K 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 1 0 0 0 1 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Four assessment tools that P469X - The Bronx School For Continuous Learners - uses to assess students are: SANDI/FAST, Fountas and Pinnell, curriculum based pre-post tests/end of unit tasks, and IEP goals. SANDI/FAST is our school wide comprehensive assessment tool used with all of our early learners. The insight that our collective data provides for our English Language Learners are that we are able to determine our students’ reading levels and potential Individual Education Program (IEP) goals and objectives. Also, through the analysis of the data the ENL teacher has insight into how to design their academic instruction. In addition, P469X uses three programs (Brighstart, Core Knowledge and Fundations) that provide us with program specific screening that include chapter and unit assessments. These program specific assessments provide pedagogues with a breakdown of individual opportunites. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The ENL teacher ( Mr. LaPorta) evaluates the success of P469X programs for ELLs by focusing towards the Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP). The ENL teacher works cooperatively with the school staff to assist our ELL students to perform their best on their standardized and alternate assessment exams by: utilizing portfolios and different assessment tools to evaluate the students’ progress (teacher- made checklists, informal tests and rubrics). 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Not applicable. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Based on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT statistical scores a data pattern has proven that the majority of the students are on a beginner level. In addition, of the students that were able to respond to all four modalities, the speaking and listening skills are the students’ strengths. On the other hand, additional support is needed in the reading and writing modalities for those who were able to take the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT. This pattern has been displayed at every grade level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. See below b. TBE program. If applicable. Our organizational model at The Bronx School For Continuous Learners is integrated and stand-alone ENL services and TBE . The students are grouped based on classification of student to staff ratios of ICT, 12:1:1, 8:1;1 and 6:1:1, within three consecutive grades and IEP recommendations. Depending on these needs, the integrated and stand-alone models are used to assist students across curricular areas and allow the students to remain in their classroom with their English speaking peers and receive stand-alone services. Utilizing the integrated model allows the ENL and classroom teachers to collaborate in the facilitation of classroom instruction. As a result the English Language Learners are given the opportunity to acquire the English language 3  across all subject areas. In doing so, the ENL teacher (Mr.LaPorta) provides both English and English Language Arts content instruction simultaneously. The integrated and stand-alone models proceed at the rate mandated by CR Part 154.2 which are determined by level of proficiency. In addition, the program models consist of heterogeneous and homogeneous groupings. Our instruction values the students’ backgrounds, the need to prepare the students for a college education. Our curriculum is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards, the English as a New Language Standards, and the New York State Language Standards. Parent and community involvement are of utmost importance. Emphasis is placed on content areas (Science and Social Studies) through the early literacy block, with co-teaching taking place between the ENL teacher and classroom teacher. c. DL program. If applicable. P469X was selected to begin a dual language program for the 2015-2016 school year - The grant money did not roll over into the 2015-2016 school year; Therefore, at this time, we do not offer a Dual Language program. We plan on re-applying for the grant for the 2017-2018 school year. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The certified ENL instructor (Mr.LaPorta) ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided, according to the student’s proficiency level through, our Freestanding ENL Program. The plan of the ENL teacher (Mr.LaPorta), is to make certain, that our students are being fully serviced. According to CR-Part 154.2, correct mandated minutes in academic support with instruction in English is delivered. Minutes served are based on students’ NYSESLAT and NYSITELL scores. In collaboration with the ENL teacher (Mr.LaPorta) and other pedagogues our school is meeting the New York State – mandated ENL/ELA allotted instruction times. In accordance with CR-Part 154.2 mandates, our ELLs in grades K-2, who scored at the entering and emerging proficiency levels are receiving 360 minutes of ENL integrated and stand-alone services/week. In Spring 2015, our students will be administered the NYSESLAT. According to CR-Part 154.2 mandates, all the P469X English Language Learners who will reach transitioning or expanding level will be given 180 minutes of of integrated and stand-alone ENL/180 minutes of ELA/week. Students participate in the ELA program with their classroom teachers.Emphasis is placed on content areas (Science and Social Studies) through the early literacy block, with co-teaching taking place between the ENL teacher and classroom teacher. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The ENL Freestanding Program Model is delivered in the English language. Therefore, the content areas are modified according to the students’ proficiency level. Based on the students’ different learning styles and individual student needs, the ENL teacher engages each student in their learning process. The instructional approaches and methods used to make content areas comprehensible to enrich language development are: 4  Balanced Literacy Total Physical Response (TPR) Cooperative Learning Whole Language Instruction Community Language Learning Native Approach for Acquisition Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA) Differentiated Instruction In addition to the above instructional approaches , the ENL teacher also utilizes, Scaffolding, Modeling, Bridging , Contextualization, Schema Building, Facilitation of Language Functions, and Text Representation. The use of Bloom’s Taxonomy instruction eases the development of the students’ meta-cognition. We meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards by incorporating literature, informational text, and foundation skills in our ELA program. In the P469X ENL program, the teacher includes the Math Common Core Learning Standards which include geometry, counting, measurement and data, to name a few concept skills. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that our new English Language Learners are appropriately evaluated in the Spanish language the Bilingual teachers, Yudelka Ramirez, Emma Castro and Jose Isaac administer the Spanish Lab. P469X has an alternate paraprofessional who can help our students who have been in the system. Also, teacher-made assessments and books in the students’ native languages are used to evaluate ELL students. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status P469X has an instructional plan for Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) if they become part of our organization. The ENL teacher/s would provide support in the form of literacy, mathematics, technology, Academic Intervention Programs and buddy systems. The certified ENL teacher (Mr.LaPorta) would service the students with the necessary amount of time according to their mandates , following the integrated and stand-alone models using differentiated instruction/materials during their ELA classes. The instructional goal for newcomers is that they learn to use English to make progress in all academic areas and social settings. Recognizing that students might be kinesthetic , visual and/or auditory learners, ENL teacher uses a multitude of education resources to address these learning styles. For example, cooperative learning groups, play a significant role in the ELL teaching approach. When these groups meet , students present their writing , pictures, and stories to their peers. In other instances, the Total Physical Response (TPR) method may be used by the ENL teachers to create activities for improving the listening skills of students. In these activities, students follow small commands related to action words that are used in lessons. In addition, graphic organizers are used to access students in organizing ideas for understanding a text. The ENL teacher provides the mandated amount of minutes necessary to comply with CR-Part 154.2. Mr.LaPorta provides integarted and stand-alone delivery of service alternatively according to the individual levels of proficiency. For ELLs receiving services for 4-6 years the goal is for them to increase their 5  English literacy in the four modalities: listening, speaking ,reading and writing. Critical thinking development is essential for this group of students. The ENL certified teacher always differentiates instruction to meet the needs of the students. The entering and emerging students receive 360 minutes of integrated and stand-alone ENL instruction/week. The students who scored at a transitioning and exapanding level on the NYSITELL or NYSESLAT will receive 180 minutes/week of ENL instruction. The integrated and stand-alone models is applied based on the collaboration between the homeroom teacher and the ENL instructor. The ENL teacher and the classroom teachers usually meet during a common planning time to discuss the appropriate differentiated curriculum for the ELL students. Our educational plan for the long-term English Language Learners is to facilitate academic literacy skills in English. The ENL teacher recommends that explicit literacy instruction should be integrated in all content area subjects, such as, Math, Science, Social Studies, ENL and English Language Arts classes. Our ENL program model approach to literacy instruction is coordinated across all subject areas to support the development of students’ academic language and literacy skills. Long-term English Language Learners are taught separately from new arrivals so that instruction can focus on academic literacy in English. The certified ENL teacher collaborates with classroom teachers and related service providers to ensure that long-term ELLs receive the instruction needed. When the ELL students score proficiency on the NYSESLAT exam, the ENL teacher will continue to support them by going into the classroom and listening to their language needs. The ENL teacher meets with classroom teachers and related service providers to discuss the progress of the former ELL students. The ENL teacher contacts the parents of the proficient students to make sure that they are doing well at home and in their communities. ELL proficient students and all ELL students are advised to participate in the Title III after school program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? P469X is a District 75 school and our instructional strategies and grade-level materials are created to meet the diverse needs of English Language Learners-Students with Disabilities (SWDS) within the least restrictive environment. We use core curriculum early literacy and early mathematics programs (Core Knowledge, Go Math, Fundations, BrightStart). 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The ENL teacher uses curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable diverse ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals based on best practices. Examples of best practices are: cooperative grouping, collaborative learning, adapted and modified materials, co-teaching and planning, ongoing assessment , differentiated instruction, connecting prior knowledge, the use of SMART boards, and incorporating the Common Core Standards, in conjunction with the English Language Proficiency Standards. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 6  The target intervention for English Language Learners incorporated in all content areas used at P469X are: Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS) and Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP). While an ELL student may learn the social skills rapidly, it may take up to seven or more years to develop academic skills. The intervention programs for ELLs are: Balanced and Integrated Literacy, Applied Learning, Adapted Technology, Getting Ready to Learn, Social Emotional Literacy Program and Fundations. Academic Intervention services are provided by the Special Education teachers in English using alternate assessments. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? In the 2016-2017 school year, P469X will implement the following programs: Monthly newsletter, family engagement every Tuesday, our health fair and a title III weekend enrichment program. Our school newsletter will have an ENL section that will provide the community with updates, information and a frequently asked question section. Our parents are encouraged to participate in our weekly family engagement days so they can track their childs progress, make suggestions, and collabotrate with the teacher to set proper IEP goals for their child. Our volunteer health fair is a community based learning fair that encourages mental, physical and emotional health. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At the present time, P469X is a new school and all of our programs and services for ELLs at The Bronx School For Continuous Learners are being implemented and data is being collected . In order to afford that every student in our school receives equal access to our school programs, the students’ daily schedule is designed to fulfill their academic requirements that are aligned with the content area curriculum. The IEP mandated services offered in our school for ELLs are: Speech Therapy, Counseling, Physical Therapy, Occupational Therapy, and Positive Behavior and Intervention Supports. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our English Language Learners are supported in their academic programs by having the opportunity to participate in all school programs. Their alternate bilingual paraprofessionals and their related support service providers make certain that they are provided supplemental services. P469X is a District 75 school and therefore, all SWDs are offered a Chapter 683 program to continue education all year round. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The following instructional materials are used to instruct all level English Language Learners in standardized and alternate assessment classes: ENL Standards, ELA Standards , Common Core Standards, Alternate Grade Level Indicators (AGLI), Performance Indicators, Bloom Taxonomy, Smart Board, Picture Symbols, Microsoft Word PowerPoint, Balanced Literacy Program, dictionaries, fictional and non-fictional library books, and leveled library books. In order for English Language Learners to develop reading comprehension, we (Ms. Silva and Ms. Pearlstein) use different types of textbooks and resources. Therefore, they will be able to make the connection to text to text, text to self, and text to the world. : 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? P469X is a Freestanding ENL Program model , therefore, Native language support is developed through different types of thematic units. These will be created taking into account the multicultural backgrounds of our ELL students. Students will be able to learn about one another as well as share information about their own culture. In this way, Mr.LaPorta and the Bilingual teachers (Yudelka Ramirez, Nancy Isaac, and Jose Isaac) are developing the pride of their heritage. Learning about different countries, different foods and holiday celebrations with the sense to create one community is our goal. Utilizing the Total Physical Response is another approach through modeling, body motions and visual aid, which will help students to internalize the meaning of the lesson. Another reference for native language support is the classroom library filled with books and dictionaries in the students’ native language. Finally, alternate bilingual paraprofessionals in the classroom supplement extra support for native language, if needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. 7  Required services support and resources for ELLs correspond to the English Language Learners’ ages and academic grade level. The purpose of this is to tap into the students’ academic cognitive development in an appropriate manner. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The following instructional materials are used to instruct all level English Language Learners in standardized and alternate assessment classes: ENL Standards, ELA Standards , Common Core Standards, Alternate Grade Level Indicators (AGLI), Performance Indicators, Bloom Taxonomy, Smart Board, Picture Symbols, Microsoft Word PowerPoint, Balanced Literacy Program, dictionaries, fictional and non-fictional library books, and leveled library books. In order for English Language Learners to develop reading comprehension, we (Ms. Silva and Ms. Pearlstein) use different types of textbooks and resources. Therefore, they will be able to make the connection to text to text, text to self, and text to the world. : 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). P469X in alignment with the New York State English as a New Language Learning Standards and English Language Arts Standards, and Common Core State Standards engage in programs and activities to assist newly enrolled ELL students after the first day of school. The newcomers are provided with the following services: ENL integrated and stand-alone models in collaboration with the classroom teachers and paraprofessionals. We also encourage our students to buddy up with newly enrolled English Language Learners as an additional support system. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Not applicable. Since The Bronx School For Continuous Learners is a K-3 building and the language of academic instruction is English. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Not applicable. P469X does not offer a dual language program at this time. Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? At P469X, there is a professional development plan for all ELL personnel, and teachers of ELLs. On Mondays and Tuesdays of every week, our staff opted for repurposed work days for professional developments and parent interactions. The District 75 English Language Learner Department hosts professional development courses for all ELL teachers. After the ESL teacher (Mr.LaPorta) attends their professional developments, the information acquired by them is distributed to all staff of ELLs. The purpose is for all the personnel (teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, secretaries, parent coordinator and administrators) who are involved with ELLs to be aware of teaching best practices, Common Core Learning Standards, 8  methodologies, approaches and strategies that will help our ELL students to be successful. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. P469X serves students from kindergarten to second grade. The ESL teacher (Mr.LaPorta) will collaborate with the instructors from the third grade on. This will facilitate the students’ transition to higher levels. The ESL teacher will thoroughly discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the ELL students, their learning styles, and their NYSESLAT proficiency levels. Furthermore, when the ELL student is transitioning from the second grade to third grade, the ENL teacher (Mr.LaPorta) will be part of the team to decide the best placement for the student. P469X allocates Mondays, between 2:20PM and 3:40PM, for professional development. Over the course of the year, 15% of the professional development sessions will comprise of ELL-specific professional development and will be provided by the ENL and Bilingual teachers in collaboration with district 75 ELL department. All P469X ENL and bilingual teachers will receive 50% ELL- specific professional development from the district ELL office courses. All attendance is mandatory and records are kept on file by the unit coordinators and administration. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P469X is a district 75 school and all parents attend IEP meetings to discuss their child's progress, goals, concerns, language development and revise or add goals to fit the needs of the student. Our bilingual teachers/school psychologists are utilized to translate and interpret in the parents home language. If we do not have the a bilingual teacher staff member that is proficient in the parents/guardians language, then the translation and interpretation unit will be utilized (718-752-7373). 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Currently, P69X has a small population and the parental involvement at The Bronx School For Continuous Learners is enhanced and encouraged through the entire staff. Our Bilingual teachers communicate with the families and guardians of English Language Learners by providing translated school documents and any other information that needs to be sent home. In addition, interpretation services will be provided, as it is needed in the fifteen foreign languages that the Department of Education offers. Translators will be available to come to the school or be accessible by phone with any of the translation or interpretation needs of the ELL parents. Parent outreach includes opportunities for parents to come to P469X on Tuesdays throughout the school year. Parents of ELLs are always invited and encouraged to participate in parent- teacher conferences, IEP meetings, and Chapter 683 programs. At these gatherings, parents are always asked by the ENL teachers if they have any questions or concerns about their child’s progress in the ENL program. 9  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Janine Tubiolo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P469X School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Janine Tubiolo Title Principal Marcia Pitt Assistant Principal n/a Parent Coordinator Alex LaPorta ENL/Bilingual Teacher Digma Antigu Parent Yudelka Ramirez Teacher/Subject Area Raisa Maruri Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Gladys Manosalvas Other School Psychologist Tamica Balay Other Speech Therapist Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/31/16 10/31/16 10/31/16 10/31/16 10/31/16 10/31/16 10/31/16 10/31/16 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75X469 School Name: P469X Superintendent: Gary Hecht The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At intake and the completion of the Home Languaage Identification Survey, parents are asked to indicate their language of choice for both oral and written communication. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Spanish Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 3  English 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Monthly Newsletter Parent Teacher Conference Announcements School Closings Title III Saturday Program IEP Meeting Notices and completed IEPs General school correspondence in the language of communication indicated by the parent Annual School Handbook 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Curriculum Night - September Meet and Greet - September interpretation service(s)? 4  Parent Teacher Conferences - November and May Parent Workshops - Monthly Face to face meetings with parents - as needed Weekly parent outreach via the atelephone (extended workday - Tuesdays) 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Parents will be informed at our Parent IEP and other monthly parent engaement activities. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Parents are asked to complete an evaluaton survey at the end of all our meetings to provide feedback 5 
